{"id": "2987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2987", "title": "Acts of Union 1707", "text": "Acts of Union 1707\n\nThe Acts of Union were two Acts of Parliament: the Union with Scotland Act 1706 passed by the Parliament of England, and the Union with England Act passed in 1707 by the Parliament of Scotland. They put into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union that had been agreed on 22 July 1706, following negotiation between commissioners representing the parliaments of the two countries. By the two Acts, the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotlandwhich at the time were separate states with separate legislatures, but with the same monarchwere, in the words of the Treaty, \"United into One Kingdom by the Name of Great Britain\".\n\nThe two countries had shared a monarch since the Union of the Crowns in 1603, when King James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne from his double first cousin twice removed, Queen Elizabeth I. Although described as a Union of Crowns, until 1707 there were in fact two separate Crowns resting on the same head (as opposed to the implied creation of a single Crown and a single Kingdom, exemplified by the later Kingdom of Great Britain). There had been three attempts in 1606, 1667, and 1689 to unite the two countries by Acts of Parliament, but it was not until the early 18th century that both political establishments came to support the idea, albeit for different reasons.\n\nThe Acts took effect on 1 May 1707. On this date, the Scottish Parliament and the English Parliament united to form the Parliament of Great Britain, based in the Palace of Westminster in London, the home of the English Parliament. Hence, the Acts are referred to as the Union of the Parliaments. On the Union, the historian Simon Schama said \"What began as a hostile merger, would end in a full partnership in the most powerful going concern in the world ... it was one of the most astonishing transformations in European history.\"\n\nEngland and Scotland were separate states for several centuries before eventual union, and English attempts to take over Scotland by military force in the late 13th and early 14th centuries were ultimately unsuccessful (see the Wars of Scottish Independence). The first attempts at Union surrounded the foreseen unification of the Royal lines of Scotland and England. In pursuing the English throne in the 1560s, Mary, Queen of Scots pledged herself to a peaceful union between the two kingdoms.\n\nEngland and Scotland were ruled by the same king for the first time in 1603 when James VI of Scotland also became the king of England. However they remained two separate states until 1 May 1707.\n\nThe first attempt to unite the parliaments of England and Scotland was by Mary's son, King James VI and I. On his accession to the English throne in 1603 King James announced his intention to unite his two realms so that he would not be \"guilty of bigamy\". James used his royal prerogative powers to take the style of 'King of Great Britain' and to give an explicitly British character to his court and person. Whilst James assumed the creation of a full union was a foregone conclusion, the Parliament of England was concerned that the formation of a new state would deprive England of its ancient liberties, taking on the more absolutist monarchical structure James had previously enjoyed in Scotland. In the meantime, James declared that Great Britain be viewed 'as presently united, and as one realm and kingdom, and the subjects of both realms as one people'.\n\nThe Scottish and English parliaments established a commission to negotiate a union, formulating an instrument of union between the two countries. However, the idea of political union was unpopular, and when James dropped his policy of a speedy union, the topic quietly disappeared from the legislative agenda. When the House of Commons attempted to revive the proposal in 1610, it was met with a more open hostility.\n\nThe Solemn League and Covenant 1643 sought a forced union of the Church of England into the Church of Scotland, and although the covenant referred repeatedly to union between the three kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, a political union was not spelled out.\n\nIn the aftermath of the Civil War, in which the Covenanters had fought for the King, Oliver Cromwell occupied Scotland and began a process of creating a 'Godly Britannic' Union between the former Kingdoms. In 1651, the Parliament of England issued the Tender of Union declaration supporting Scotland's incorporation into the Commonwealth and sent Commissioners to Scotland with the express purpose of securing support for Union, which was assented to by the Commissioners (Members of Parliament) in Scotland. On 12 April 1654, Cromwell – styling himself Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland – enacted \"An Ordinance by the Protector for the Union of England and Scotland,\" which created 'one Commonwealth and under one Government' to be known as the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland. The ordinance was ratified by the Second Protectorate Parliament, as an Act of Union, on 26 June 1657. One united Parliament sat in Westminster, with 30 representatives from Scotland and 30 from Ireland joining the existing members from England. Whilst free trade was brought about amongst the new Commonwealth, the economic benefits were generally not felt as a result of heavy taxation used to fund Cromwell's New Model Army.\n\nThis republican union was dissolved automatically with the restoration of King Charles II to the thrones of England and Scotland. Scottish members expelled from the Commonwealth Parliament petitioned unsuccessfully for a continuance of the union. Cromwell's union had simultaneously raised interest in and suspicion of the concept of union and when Charles II attempted to recreate the union and fulfil the work of his grandfather in 1669, negotiations between Commissioners ground to a halt.\n\nAn abortive scheme for union occurred in Scotland in 1670.\n\nFollowing the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the records of the Parliament of Scotland show much discussion of possible union. William III and Mary II, whilst supportive of the idea, had no interest in allowing it to delay their enthronement. Impetus for this incorporating union came almost entirely from King William, who feared leaving Scotland open to a French invasion. In the 1690s, the economic position of Scotland worsened, and relations between Scotland and England became strained. In the following decade, however, union again became a significant topic of political debate.\n\nDeeper political integration had been a key policy of Queen Anne from the time she acceded to the throne in 1702. Under the aegis of the Queen and her ministers in both kingdoms, the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed to participate in fresh negotiations for a union treaty in 1705.\n\nBoth countries appointed 31 commissioners to conduct the negotiations. Most of the Scottish commissioners favoured union, and about half were government ministers and other officials. At the head of the list was Queensberry, and the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, the Earl of Seafield. The English commissioners included the Lord High Treasurer, the Earl of Godolphin, the Lord Keeper, Baron Cowper, and a large number of Whigs who supported union. Tories were not in favour of union and only one was represented among the commissioners.\n\nNegotiations between the English and Scottish commissioners took place between 16 April and 22 July 1706 at the Cockpit in London. Each side had its own particular concerns. Within a few days, England gained a guarantee that the Hanoverian dynasty would succeed Queen Anne to the Scottish crown, and Scotland received a guarantee of access to colonial markets, in the hope that they would be placed on an equal footing in terms of trade.\n\nAfter negotiations ended in July 1706, the acts had to be ratified by both Parliaments. In Scotland, about 100 of the 227 members of the Parliament of Scotland were supportive of the Court Party. For extra votes the pro-court side could rely on about 25 members of the Squadrone Volante, led by the Marquess of Montrose and the Duke of Roxburghe. Opponents of the court were generally known as the Country party, and included various factions and individuals such as the Duke of Hamilton, Lord Belhaven and Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, who spoke forcefully and passionately against the union. The Court party enjoyed significant funding from England and the Treasury and included many who had accumulated debts following the Darien Disaster.\n\nIn Scotland, the Duke of Queensberry was largely responsible for the successful passage of the Union act by the Scottish Parliament. In Scotland, he received much criticism from local residents, but in England he was cheered for his action. He had received around half of the funding awarded by the Westminster treasury for himself. In April 1707, he travelled to London to attend celebrations at the royal court, and was greeted by groups of noblemen and gentry lined along the road. From Barnet, the route was lined with crowds of cheering people, and once he reached London a huge crowd had formed. On 17 April, the Duke was gratefully received by the Queen at Kensington Palace.\n\nThe English purpose was to ensure that Scotland would not choose a monarch different from the one on the English throne. The two countries had shared a king for much of the previous century, but the English were concerned that an independent Scotland with a different king, even if he were a Protestant, might make alliances against England. The English succession was provided for by the English Act of Settlement 1701, which ensured that the monarch of England would be a Protestant member of the House of Hanover. Until the Union of Parliaments, the Scottish throne might be inherited by a different successor after Queen Anne: the Scottish Act of Security 1704 granted parliament the right to choose a successor and explicitly required a choice different from the English monarch unless the English were to grant free trade and navigation. Many people in England were unhappy about the prospect, however. English overseas possessions made England very wealthy in comparison to Scotland, a poor country with few roads, very little industry and almost no Navy. This made some view unification as a markedly unequal relationship.\n\nIn Scotland, some claimed that union would enable Scotland to recover from the financial disaster wrought by the Darien scheme through English assistance and the lifting of measures put in place through the Alien Act to force the Scottish Parliament into compliance with the Act of Settlement.\n\nThe combined votes of the Court party with a majority of the Squadrone Volante were sufficient to ensure the final passage of the treaty through the House.\n\nPersonal financial interests were also allegedly involved. Many Commissioners had invested heavily in the Darien scheme and they believed that they would receive compensation for their losses; Article 15 granted £398,085 10s sterling to Scotland, a sum known as The Equivalent, to offset future liability towards the English national debt. In essence it was also used as a means of compensation for investors in the Company of Scotland's Darien scheme, as 58.6% was allocated to its shareholders and creditors.\nEven more direct bribery was also said to be a factor. £20,000 (£240,000 Scots) was dispatched to Scotland for distribution by the Earl of Glasgow. James Douglas, 2nd Duke of Queensberry, the Queen's Commissioner in Parliament, received £12,325, more than 60% of the funding. (Some contend that all of this money was properly accounted for as compensation for loss of office, pensions and so forth not outwith the usual run of government. It is perhaps a debate that will never be set to rest. However, modern research has shown that payments were made to supporters of union that appear not to have been overdue salaries. At least four payments were made to people who were not even members of the Scottish Parliament.) Robert Burns referred to this:\n\n<poem>We're bought and sold for English Gold,\nSuch a Parcel of Rogues in a Nation.</poem>\n\nSome of the money was used to hire spies, such as Daniel Defoe; his first reports were of vivid descriptions of violent demonstrations against the Union. \"A Scots rabble is the worst of its kind,\" he reported, \"for every Scot in favour there is 99 against\". Years later Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, originally a leading Unionist, wrote in his memoirs that,\n\n(Defoe) was a spy among us, but not known as such, otherwise the Mob of Edinburgh would pull him to pieces.The Treaty could be considered very unpopular at the time. Popular unrest occurred in Edinburgh, as mentioned above, with some lesser but still substantial riots in Glasgow. The people of Edinburgh demonstrated against the treaty, and their apparent leader in opposition to the Unionists, was James Hamilton, 4th Duke of Hamilton. However, Hamilton was actually on the side of the English Government. Demonstrators in Edinburgh were opposed to the Union, for many reasons: they feared the Kirk would be Anglicised; that Anglicisation would remove democracy from the only really elementally democratic part of the Kingdom and they feared that tax rises would come.\n\nSir George Lockhart of Carnwath, the only member of the Scottish negotiating team against union, noted that \"The whole nation appears against the Union\" and even Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, an ardent pro-unionist and Union negotiator, observed that the treaty was \"contrary to the inclinations of at least three-fourths of the Kingdom\". Public opinion against the Treaty as it passed through the Scottish Parliament was voiced through petitions from shires, burghs, presbyteries and parishes. The Convention of Royal Burghs also petitioned against the Union as proposed:\n\nNot one petition in favour of an incorporating union was received by Parliament. On the day the treaty was signed, the carilloner in St Giles Cathedral, Edinburgh, rang the bells in the tune \"Why should I be so sad on my wedding day?\" Threats of widespread civil unrest resulted in Parliament imposing martial law.\n\nIreland, the third of the \"sister kingdoms\", was not included in the union. The effective government of Ireland was in the hands of the 'Protestant Ascendancy', a minority elite (about 10% of the population). The Roman Catholic majority were systematically excluded from political and military discourse through a series of post-Cromwellian Penal Laws, limiting their rights to property, education, and the franchise.\n\nIn July 1707 each House of the Parliament of Ireland passed a congratulatory address to Queen Anne, praying that \"May God put it in your royal heart to add greater strength and lustre to your crown, by a still more comprehensive Union\". The British government did not respond to the invitation and an equal union between Great Britain and Ireland was out of consideration until the 1790s.\n\nIreland's benefits from the Union of 1707 were therefore few. Its preferential status in trade with England now extended to Scotland. However, Ireland was left unequal and unrepresented in the Parliament of Great Britain. The Kingdom of Ireland was to remain separate, and legally subordinate to Great Britain until 1784. The union with Ireland finally came about on 1 January 1801.\n\nThe Treaty of Union, agreed between representatives of the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland in 1706, consisted of 25 articles, 15 of which were economic in nature. In Scotland, each article was voted on separately and several clauses in articles were delegated to specialised subcommittees. Article 1 of the treaty was based on the political principle of an incorporating union and this was secured by a majority of 116 votes to 83 on 4 November 1706. To minimise the opposition of the Church of Scotland, an Act was also passed to secure the Presbyterian establishment of the Church, after which the Church stopped its open opposition, although hostility remained at lower levels of the clergy. The treaty as a whole was finally ratified on 16 January 1707 by a majority of 110 votes to 69.\n\nThe two Acts incorporated provisions for Scotland to send representative peers from the Peerage of Scotland to sit in the House of Lords. It guaranteed that the Church of Scotland would remain the established church in Scotland, that the Court of Session would \"remain in all time coming within Scotland\", and that Scots law would \"remain in the same force as before\". Other provisions included the restatement of the Act of Settlement 1701 and the ban on Roman Catholics from taking the throne. It also created a customs union and monetary union.\n\nThe Act provided that any \"laws and statutes\" that were \"contrary to or inconsistent with the terms\" of the Act would \"cease and become void.\"\n\nSoon after the Union, the Act 6 Anne c.40later infelicitously named the Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707united the English and Scottish Privy Councils and decentralised Scottish administration by appointing justices of the peace in each shire to carry out administration. In effect it took the day-to-day government of Scotland out of the hands of politicians and into those of the College of Justice.\n\nThe English and Scottish parliaments had evolved along different lines; especially, the Parliament of Scotland had been unicameral while that of England had been bicameral. Following Union, the parliament at Westminster followed the English model.\n\nDefoe drew upon his Scottish experience to write his \"Tour thro' the whole Island of Great Britain\", published in 1726, where he admitted that the increase of trade and population in Scotland, which he had predicted as a consequence of the Union, was \"not the case, but rather the contrary\".\n\nHowever, by the time Samuel Johnson and James Boswell made their tour in 1773, recorded in \"A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland\", Johnson noted that Scotland was \"a nation of which the commerce is hourly extending, and the wealth increasing\" and in particular that Glasgow had become one of the greatest cities of Britain.\n\nA commemorative two-pound coin was issued to mark the tercentennial—300th anniversary—of the Union, which occurred two days before the Scottish Parliament general election on 3 May 2007.\n\nThe Scottish Executive held a number of commemorative events through the year including an education project led by the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, an exhibition of Union-related objects and documents at the National Museums of Scotland and an exhibition of portraits of people associated with the Union at the National Galleries of Scotland.\n\n! colspan=\"2\" style=\"background:#e9e9e9 text-align:left;\"|Commissioner\n! style=\"background:#e9e9e9 text-align:right;\"|Constituency/Position\n! style=\"background:#e9e9e9 text-align:right;\"|Party\n! style=\"background:#e9e9e9 text-align:right;\"|Vote\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "2988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2988", "title": "Admiralty", "text": "Admiralty\n\nThe Admiralty formerly known as the Office of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs, was the government department responsible for the command of the Royal Navy first in the Kingdom of England, second in the Kingdom of Great Britain, and from 1801-1964, the United Kingdom and former British Empire. Originally exercised by a single person, the Lord High Admiral, the Admiralty was, from the early 18th century onwards, almost invariably put \"in commission\" and exercised by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, who sat on the Board of Admiralty.\n\nIn 1964, the functions of the Admiralty were transferred to a new Admiralty Board, which is a committee of the tri-service Defence Council of the United Kingdom and part of the Navy Department of the Ministry of Defence. The new Admiralty Board meets only twice a year, and the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy is controlled by a Navy Board (not to be confused with the historic Navy Board described later in this article). It is common for the various authorities now in charge of the Royal Navy to be referred to as simply \"The Admiralty\".\n\nThe title of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom was vested in the monarch from 1964 to 2011. The title was awarded to Philip, Duke of Edinburgh by Queen Elizabeth II on his 90th birthday. There also continues to be a Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom and a Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom, both of which are honorary offices.\n\nThe office of \"Admiral of England\" (or \"Lord Admiral\" and later \"Lord High Admiral\") was created around 1400 although there had already been Admirals of the Northern and Western Seas. In 1546, King Henry VIII established the Council of the Marine, later to become the Navy Board, to oversee administrative affairs of the naval service. Operational control of the Royal Navy remained the responsibility of the Lord High Admiral, who was one of the nine Great Officers of State.\n\nIn 1628, Charles I put the office of Lord High Admiral into commission and control of the Royal Navy passed to a committee in the form of the Board of Admiralty. The office of Lord High Admiral passed a number of times in and out of commission until 1709 after which the office was almost permanently in commission (the last Lord High Admiral being the future King William IV in the early 19th century).\n\nIn 1831, the first Navy Board was abolished as a separate entity, and its duties and responsibilities were given over to the Admiralty.\n\nIn 1964, the Admiralty along with the War Office and the Air Ministry as separate departments of state were abolished, and re-emerged under one single new Ministry of Defence. Within the expanded Ministry of Defence are the new \"Admiralty Board\" which has a separate (second) Navy Board responsible for the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy., the \"Army Board\" and the \"Air Force Board\", each headed by the Secretary of State for Defence.\n\nWhen the office of Lord High Admiral was in commission, as it was for most of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, until it reverted to the Crown, it was exercised by a Board of Admiralty, officially known as the \"Commissioners for Exercising the Office of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, &c.\" (alternatively of England, Great Britain or the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland depending on the period).\n\nThe Board of Admiralty consisted of a number of Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. The Lords Commissioners were always a mixture of admirals, known as Naval Lords or Sea Lords and Civil Lords, normally politicians. The quorum of the Board was two commissioners and a secretary.\n\nThe president of the Board was known as the First Lord of the Admiralty, who was a member of the Cabinet. After 1806, the First Lord of the Admiralty was always a civilian while the professional head of the navy came to be (and is still today) known as the First Sea Lord.\n\nThe first real concerted effort to professionally organize the Admiralty was started by Henry VIII, this management approach would continue in force in the Royal navy until to 1832. In this organization a dual system operated the Lord High Admiral (from 1546) then Commissioners of the Admiralty (from 1628) exercised the function of general control (military administration) of the Navy and they were usually responsible for the conduct of any war, while the actual supply lines, support and services were managed by four principal officers, namely, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor and Clerk of the Acts, responsible individually for finance, supervision of accounts, Shipbuilding and maintenance of ships, and record of business. These principle officers came to be known as the Navy Board responsible for (civil administration) of the navy, from 1546 to 1832.\n\nThis structure of administering the navy lasted for 285 years, however the supply system was often inefficient and corrupt its deficiencies were due as much to its limitations of the times they operated in. The various functions within the Admiralty were not coordinated effectively and lacked inter-dependency with each other, with the result that in 1832 Sir James Graham abolished the Navy Board and merged its functions within the Board of Admiralty's that at the time also had distinct advantages, however it failed to retain the principle of distinctions between the Admiralty and supply and a lot of bureaucracy followed with the merger.\n\nIn 1860 saw big growth in the development of technical crafts, the expansion of more admiralty branches that really began with age of steam that would have an enormous influence on the navy and naval thought.\n\nBetween 1860 and 1908 there was no real study of strategy and of staff work conducted within the naval service, it was practically ignored. All the navy's talent flowed to the great technical university's. This school of thought for the next 50 years was exclusively technically based the first serious attempt to introduce a sole management body to administer naval service manifested itself in the creation of the Admiralty Navy War Council in 1909. It was perceived by officials within the Admiralty at this time that the running of war was quite a simple matter for any flag officer who required no formal training. However this mentality would be severely questioned with the advent of the Agadir crisis when the Admiralty's war plans heavily criticized, following this a new advisory body called the Admiralty War Staff was then instituted in 1912 headed by the Chief of the War Staff who was responsible for administering three new sub-divisions. The new War Staff had hardly found its feet and it continually struggled with the opposition to its existence by senior officers they were categorically opposed to a staff. The deficiencies of the system within this department of state could be seen in the conduct of the Dardanelles campaign. There was no mechanisms in place to answer the big strategic questions in 1914 a Trade Division was created.\n\nIn 1916, Sir John Jellicoe came to the Admiralty, he re-organized the war staff as following: Chief of War Staff, Operations, Intelligence, Signal Section, Mobilization, Trade.\n\nIt was not until 1917 that the admiralty department was again thoroughly reorganized and really began to function as a military staff role in May that year, when the term \"Admiralty War Staff\" was changed and that department and its functional role was replaced by a new \"Admiralty Naval Staff\" and the new office of Chief of the Naval Staff was merged in the office of the First Sea Lord there was also appointed a new Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff and an Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff who were all given seats on the Board of Admiralty. This for the first time gave the naval staff direct representation on the Board, and the presence of three naval senior members ensured the necessary authority to carry through any operation of war. The (D.C.N.S.) would direct all operations and movements of the fleet, while the (A.C.N.S.) would be responsible for mercantile movements and anti-submarine operations.\n\nThe office of Controller would be re-established to deal with all questions relating to supply on September 6 a Deputy First Sea Lord, was added to the Board who would administer operations abroad and questions of foreign policy.\n\nIn October 1917 the development of the staff was carried one step further by the creation of two sub-committees of the Board - the Operations Committee and the Maintenance Committee. The First Lord was chairman of both, and the former consisted of the First Sea Lord and C.N.S., the Deputy 1 st S.L., D.C.N.S., A.C.N.S., and 5th Sea Lord. The latter consisted of the Deputy 1st S.L. (representing the operations committee), 2nd S.L. (personnel), 3rd S.L. (material), 4th S.L. (transport and stores), Civil Lord, Controller and Financial Secretary.\n\nThe direction of fully operational control of the Royal Navy was finally handed over to the (C.N.S.) by an order in Council, effective October 1917, under which they became responsible for the issuing of orders affecting all war operations to the fleet. It also empowered the (C.N.S) to issue orders in their own name as opposed to previously by the Secretary in the name of the Board. This would remain in place until the department was abolished in 1964 however the operational control and this system still remains in place with navy today, for the organisational structure of the admiralty department and how it developed through the centuries see the following articles below.\n\n\"Included:\"\n\nThe Admiralty complex lies between Whitehall, Horse Guards Parade and The Mall and includes five inter-connected buildings. Since the Admiralty no longer exists as a department, these buildings are now used by separate government departments:\n\nThe oldest building was long known simply as \"The Admiralty\"; it is now known officially as the Ripley Building, a three storey U-shaped brick building designed by Thomas Ripley and completed in 1726. Alexander Pope implied the architecture is rather dull, lacking either the vigour of the baroque style, fading from fashion at the time, or the austere grandeur of the Palladian style just coming into vogue. It is mainly notable for being perhaps the first purpose-built office building in Great Britain. It contained the Admiralty board room, which is still used by the Admiralty, other state rooms, offices and apartments for the Lords of the Admiralty. Robert Adam designed the screen, which was added to the entrance front in 1788. The Ripley Building is currently occupied by the Department for International Development.\n\nAdmiralty House is a moderately proportioned mansion to the south of the Ripley Building, built in the late 18th century as the residence of the First Lord of the Admiralty. It served that purpose until 1964. Winston Churchill was one of its occupants. It lacks its own entrance from Whitehall and is entered through the Ripley Building. It is a three-storey building in yellow brick with neoclassical interiors. Its rear facade faces directly onto Horse Guards Parade. The architect was Samuel Pepys Cockerell. There are now three ministerial flats in the building, which were unoccupied in 2012.\n\nThis is the largest of the Admiralty Buildings. It was begun in the late 19th century and redesigned while the construction was in progress to accommodate the extra offices needed by the naval arms race with the German Empire. It is a red brick building with white stone, detailing in the Queen Anne style with French influences. It has been used by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office from the 1960s to 2016. The Department for Education planned to move into the building in September 2017 following the Foreign and Commonwealth Office's decision to leave the building and consolidate its London staff into one building on King Charles Street.\n\nAdmiralty Arch is linked to the Old Admiralty Building by a bridge and is part of the ceremonial route from Trafalgar Square to Buckingham Palace.\n\nThis is a squat, windowless World War II fortress north west of Horse Guards Parade, now covered in ivy. See Military citadels under London for further details.\n\nIn some cases, the term \"admiralty\" is used in a wider sense, as meaning \"sea power\" or \"rule over the seas\", rather than in strict reference to the institution exercising such power. For example, the well-known lines from Kipling's \"Song of the Dead\":\n\n\nThe Building\n\nThe Office\n\n"}
{"id": "2991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2991", "title": "Amphibian (disambiguation)", "text": "Amphibian (disambiguation)\n\nAn amphibian is an ectothermic, tetrapod vertebrate.\n\nAmphibian may also refer to:\n\n"}
{"id": "2992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2992", "title": "Amputation", "text": "Amputation\n\nAmputation is the removal of a limb by trauma, medical illness, or surgery. As a surgical measure, it is used to control pain or a disease process in the affected limb, such as malignancy or gangrene. In some cases, it is carried out on individuals as a preventative surgery for such problems. A special case is that of congenital amputation, a congenital disorder, where fetal limbs have been cut off by constrictive bands. In some countries, amputation of the hands, feet or other body parts is or was used as a form of punishment for people who committed crimes. Amputation has also been used as a tactic in war and acts of terrorism; it may also occur as a war injury. In some cultures and religions, minor amputations or mutilations are considered a ritual accomplishment.\n\nIn the US, the majority of new amputations occur due to complications of the vascular system (the blood vessels), especially from diabetes. Between 1988 and 1996, there were an average of 133,735 hospital discharges for amputation per year in the US.\n\nThe word amputation is derived from the Latin \"amputare\", \"to cut away\", from \"ambi-\" (\"about\", \"around\") and \"putare\" (\"to prune\"). The English word \"amputation\" was first applied to surgery in the 17th century, possibly first in Peter Lowe's \"A discourse of the Whole Art of Chirurgerie\" (published in either 1597 or 1612); his work was derived from 16th-century French texts and early English writers also used the words \"extirpation\" (16th-century French texts tended to use \"extirper\"), \"disarticulation\", and \"dismemberment\" (from the Old French \"desmembrer\" and a more common term before the 17th century for limb loss or removal), or simply \"cutting\", but by the end of the 17th century \"amputation\" had come to dominate as the accepted medical term.\n\nLeg amputations can be divided into 2 broad categories:\n\n\n\nHemicorporectomy, or amputation at the waist, and decapitation, or amputation at the neck, are the most radical amputations.\n\nGenital modification and mutilation may involve amputating tissue, although not necessarily as a result of injury or disease.\n\nIn some rare cases when a person has become trapped in a deserted place, with no means of communication or hope of rescue, the victim has amputated his or her own limb.\n\nBody integrity identity disorder is a psychological condition in which an individual feels compelled to remove one or more of their body parts, usually a limb. In some cases, that individual may take drastic measures to remove the offending appendages, either by causing irreparable damage to the limb so that medical intervention cannot save the limb, or by causing the limb to be severed.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThe first step is ligating the supplying artery and vein, to prevent hemorrhage (bleeding). The muscles are transected, and finally the bone is sawed through with an oscillating saw. Sharp and rough edges of the bone(s) are filed down, skin and muscle flaps are then transposed over the stump, occasionally with the insertion of elements to attach a prosthesis.\n\nTraumatic amputation is the partial or total avulsion of a part of a body during a serious accident, like traffic, labor, or combat.\n\nTraumatic amputation of a human limb, either partial or total, creates the immediate danger of death from blood loss.\n\nOrthopedic surgeons often assess the severity of different injuries using the Mangled Extremity Severity Score. Given different clinical and situational factors, they can predict the likelihood of amputation. This is especially useful for emergency physicians to quickly evaluate patients and decide on consultations.\n\nTraumatic amputation is uncommon in humans (1 per 20,804 population per year). Loss of limb usually happens immediately during the accident, but sometimes a few days later after medical complications. Statistically the most common causes of traumatic amputations are:\n\nThe development of the science of microsurgery over last 40 years has provided several treatment options for a traumatic amputation, depending on the patient's specific trauma and clinical situation:\n\n\nAmputations are usually traumatic experiences. They can reduce the quality of life for patients in addition to being expensive. In the USA, a typical prosthetic limb costs in the range of $10,000–15,000 according to the American Diabetic Association. In some populations, preventing amputations is a critical task.\n\nMethods in preventing amputation, limb-sparing techniques, depend on the problems that might cause amputations to be necessary. Chronic infections, often caused by diabetes or decubitus ulcers in bedridden patients, are common causes of infections that lead to gangrene, which would then necessitate amputation.\n\nThere are two key challenges: first, many patients have impaired circulation in their extremities, and second, they have difficulty curing infections in limbs with poor vasculation (blood circulation).\nCrush injuries where there is extensive tissue damage and poor circulation also benefit from hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT). The high level of oxygenation and revascularization speed up recovery times and prevent infections.\n\nA study found that the patented method called Circulator Boot achieved significant results in prevention of amputation in patients with diabetes and arterioscleorosis. Another study found it also effective for healing limb ulcers caused by peripheral vascular disease. The boot checks the heart rhythm and compresses the limb between heartbeats; the compression helps cure the wounds in the walls of veins and arteries, and helps to push the blood back to the heart.\n\nFor victims of trauma, advances in microsurgery in the 1970s have made replantations of severed body parts possible.\n\nThe establishment of laws, rules and guidelines, and employment of modern equipment help protect people from traumatic amputations.\n\nThe individual may experience psychological trauma and emotional discomfort. The stump will remain an area of reduced mechanical stability. Limb loss can present significant or even drastic practical limitations.\n\nA large proportion of amputees (50–80%) experience the phenomenon of phantom limbs; they feel body parts that are no longer there. These limbs can itch, ache, burn, feel tense, dry or wet, locked in or trapped or they can feel as if they are moving. Some scientists believe it has to do with a kind of neural map that the brain has of the body, which sends information to the rest of the brain about limbs regardless of their existence. Phantom sensations and phantom pain may also occur after the removal of body parts other than the limbs, e.g. after amputation of the breast, extraction of a tooth (phantom tooth pain) or removal of an eye (phantom eye syndrome).\n\nA similar phenomenon is unexplained sensation in a body part unrelated to the amputated limb. It has been hypothesized that the portion of the brain responsible for processing stimulation from amputated limbs, being deprived of input, expands into the surrounding brain, (\"Phantoms in the Brain\": V.S. Ramachandran and Sandra Blakeslee) such that an individual who has had an arm amputated will experience unexplained pressure or movement on his face or head.\n\nIn many cases, the phantom limb aids in adaptation to a prosthesis, as it permits the person to experience proprioception of the prosthetic limb. To support improved resistance or usability, comfort or healing, some type of stump socks may be worn instead of or as part of wearing a prosthesis.\n\nAnother side effect can be heterotopic ossification, especially when a bone injury is combined with a head injury. The brain signals the bone to grow instead of scar tissue to form, and nodules and other growth can interfere with prosthetics and sometimes require further operations. This type of injury has been especially common among soldiers wounded by improvised explosive devices in the Iraq war.\n\nDue to technologic advances in prosthetics, many amputees live active lives with little restriction. Organizations such as the Challenged Athletes Foundation have been developed to give amputees the opportunity to be involved in athletics and adaptive sports such as Amputee Soccer.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "2994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2994", "title": "Anemometer", "text": "Anemometer\n\nAn anemometer is a device used for measuring the speed of wind, and is also a common weather station instrument. The term is derived from the Greek word \"anemos\", which means wind, and is used to describe any wind speed measurement instrument used in meteorology. The first known description of an anemometer was given by Leon Battista Alberti in 1450.\n\nThe anemometer has changed little since its development in the 15th century. Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) is said to have invented the first mechanical anemometer around 1450. In following centuries, numerous others, including Robert Hooke\n(1635–1703), developed their own versions, with some being mistakenly credited as the inventor. In 1846, John Thomas Romney Robinson (1792–1882) improved upon the design by using four hemispherical cups and mechanical wheels. In 1926, Canadian meteorologist John Patterson (January 3, 1872 – February 22, 1956) developed a three-cup anemometer, which was improved by Brevoort and Joiner in 1935. In 1991, Derek Weston added the ability to measure wind direction. In 1994, Andrews Pflitsch developed the sonic anemometer.\n\nA simple type of anemometer was invented in 1845 by Dr. John Thomas Romney Robinson, of Armagh Observatory. It consisted of four hemispherical cups mounted on horizontal arms, which were mounted on a vertical shaft. The air flow past the cups in any horizontal direction turned the shaft at a rate that was proportional to the wind speed. Therefore, counting the turns of the shaft over a set time period produced a value proportional to the average wind speed for a wide range of speeds. On an anemometer with four cups, it is easy to see that since the cups are arranged symmetrically on the end of the arms, the wind always has the hollow of one cup presented to it and is blowing on the back of the cup on the opposite end of the cross.\n\nWhen Robinson first designed his anemometer, he asserted that the cups moved one-third of the speed of the wind, unaffected by the cup size or arm length. This was apparently confirmed by some early independent experiments, but it was incorrect. Instead, the ratio of the speed of the wind and that of the cups, the anemometer factor, depends on the dimensions of the cups and arms, and may have a value between two and a little over three. Every previous experiment involving an anemometer had to be repeated.\n\nThe three-cup anemometer developed by the Canadian John Patterson in 1926 and subsequent cup improvements by Brevoort & Joiner of the USA in 1935 led to a cupwheel design which was linear and had an error of less than 3% up to . Patterson found that each cup produced maximum torque when it was at 45° to the wind flow. The three-cup anemometer also had a more constant torque and responded more quickly to gusts than the four-cup anemometer.\n\nThe three-cup anemometer was further modified by the Australian Dr Derek Weston in 1991 to measure both wind direction and wind speed. Weston added a tag to one cup, which causes the cupwheel speed to increase and decrease as the tag moves alternately with and against the wind. Wind direction is calculated from these cyclical changes in cupwheel speed, while wind speed is determined from the average cupwheel speed.\n\nThree-cup anemometers are currently used as the industry standard for wind resource assessment studies & practice.\n\nOne of the other forms of mechanical velocity anemometer is the \"vane anemometer\". It may be described as a windmill or a propeller anemometer. Unlike the Robinson anemometer, whose axis of rotation is vertical, the vane anemometer must have its axis parallel to the direction of the wind and therefore horizontal. Furthermore, since the wind varies in direction and the axis has to follow its changes, a wind vane or some other contrivance to fulfill the same purpose must be employed.\n\nA \"vane anemometer\" thus combines a propeller and a tail on the same axis to obtain accurate and precise wind speed and direction measurements from the same instrument. The speed of the fan is measured by a rev counter and converted to a windspeed by an electronic chip. Hence, volumetric flowrate may be calculated if the cross-sectional area is known.\n\nIn cases where the direction of the air motion is always the same, as in ventilating shafts of mines and buildings, wind vanes known as air meters are employed, and give satisfactory results.\n\nHot wire anemometers use a very fine wire (on the order of several micrometres) electrically heated to some temperature above the ambient. Air flowing past the wire cools the wire. As the electrical resistance of most metals is dependent upon the temperature of the metal (tungsten is a popular choice for hot-wires), a relationship can be obtained between the resistance of the wire and the flow speed.\n\nSeveral ways of implementing this exist, and hot-wire devices can be further classified as CCA (constant current anemometer), CVA (constant voltage anemometer) and CTA (constant-temperature anemometer). The voltage output from these anemometers is thus the result of some sort of circuit within the device trying to maintain the specific variable (current, voltage or temperature) constant, following Ohm's law.\n\nAdditionally, PWM (pulse-width modulation) anemometers are also used, wherein the velocity is inferred by the time length of a repeating pulse of current that brings the wire up to a specified resistance and then stops until a threshold \"floor\" is reached, at which time the pulse is sent again.\n\nHot-wire anemometers, while extremely delicate, have extremely high frequency-response and fine spatial resolution compared to other measurement methods, and as such are almost universally employed for the detailed study of turbulent flows, or any flow in which rapid velocity fluctuations are of interest.\n\nAn industrial version of the fine-wire anemometer is the thermal flow meter, which follows the same concept but uses two pins or strings to monitor the variation in temperature. The strings contain fine wires, but encasing the wires makes them much more durable and capable of accurately measuring air, gas, and emissions flow in pipes, ducts, and stacks. Industrial applications often contain dirt that will damage the classic hot-wire anemometer.\n\nIn laser Doppler velocimetry, laser Doppler anemometers use a beam of light from a laser that is divided into two beams, with one propagated out of the anemometer. Particulates (or deliberately introduced seed material) flowing along with air molecules near where the beam exits reflect, or backscatter, the light back into a detector, where it is measured relative to the original laser beam. When the particles are in great motion, they produce a Doppler shift for measuring wind speed in the laser light, which is used to calculate the speed of the particles, and therefore the air around the anemometer.\nUltrasonic anemometers, first developed in the 1950s, use ultrasonic sound waves to measure wind velocity. They measure wind speed based on the time of flight of sonic pulses between pairs of transducers. Measurements from pairs of transducers can be combined to yield a measurement of velocity in 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional flow. The spatial resolution is given by the path length between transducers, which is typically 10 to 20 cm. Ultrasonic anemometers can take measurements with very fine temporal resolution, 20 Hz or better, which makes them well suited for turbulence measurements. The lack of moving parts makes them appropriate for long-term use in exposed automated weather stations and weather buoys where the accuracy and reliability of traditional cup-and-vane anemometers are adversely affected by salty air or dust. Their main disadvantage is the distortion of the flow itself by the structure supporting the transducers, which requires a correction based upon wind tunnel measurements to minimize the effect. An international standard for this process, ISO 16622 \"Meteorology—Ultrasonic anemometers/thermometers—Acceptance test methods for mean wind measurements\" is in general circulation. Another disadvantage is lower accuracy due to precipitation, where rain drops may vary the speed of sound.\n\nSince the speed of sound varies with temperature, and is virtually stable with pressure change, ultrasonic anemometers are also used as thermometers.\nTwo-dimensional (wind speed and wind direction) sonic anemometers are used in applications such as weather stations, ship navigation, aviation, weather buoys and wind turbines. Monitoring wind turbines usually requires a refresh rate of wind speed measurements of 3 Hz, easily achieved by sonic anemometers. Three-dimensional sonic anemometers are widely used to measure gas emissions and ecosystem fluxes using the eddy covariance method when used with fast-response infrared gas analyzers or laser-based analyzers.\n\nTwo-dimensional wind sensors are of two types:\n\nAcoustic resonance anemometers are a more recent variant of sonic anemometer. The technology was invented by Dr Savvas Kapartis and patented (Acu-Res®) by FT Technologies in 2000. Whereas conventional sonic anemometers rely on time of flight measurement, acoustic resonance sensors use resonating acoustic (ultrasonic) waves within a small purpose-built cavity in order to perform their measurement.\nBuilt into the cavity is an array of ultrasonic transducers, which are used to create the separate standing-wave patterns at ultrasonic frequencies. As wind passes through the cavity, a change in the wave’s property occurs (phase shift). By measuring the amount of phase shift in the received signals by each transducer, and then by mathematically processing the data, the sensor is able to provide an accurate horizontal measurement of wind speed and direction.\n\nAcoustic resonance technology enables measurement within a small cavity, the sensors therefore tend to be typically smaller in size than other ultrasonic sensors. The small size of acoustic resonance anemometers makes them physically strong and easy to heat and therefore resistant to icing. This combination of features means that they achieve high levels of data availability and are well suited to wind turbine control and to other uses that require small robust sensors such as battlefield meteorology. One issue with this sensor type is measurement accuracy when compared to a calibrated mechanical sensor. For many end uses, this weakness is compensated for by the sensor's longevity and the fact that it does not require re-calibrating once installed.\n\nA common anemometer for basic use is constructed from a ping-pong ball attached to a string. When the wind blows horizontally, it presses on and moves the ball; because ping-pong balls are very lightweight, they move easily in light winds. Measuring the angle between the string-ball apparatus and the vertical gives an estimate of the wind speed.\n\nThis type of anemometer is mostly used for middle-school level instruction which most students make themselves, but a similar device was also flown on Phoenix Mars Lander.\n\nThe first designs of anemometers which measure the pressure were divided into plate and tube classes.\n\nThese are the first modern anemometers. They consist of a flat plate suspended from the top so that the wind deflects the plate. In 1450, the Italian art architect Leon Battista Alberti invented the first mechanical anemometer; in 1664 it was re-invented by Robert Hooke (who is often mistakenly considered the inventor of the first anemometer). Later versions of this form consisted of a flat plate, either square or circular, which is kept normal to the wind by a wind vane. The pressure of the wind on its face is balanced by a spring. The compression of the spring determines the actual force which the wind is exerting on the plate, and this is either read off on a suitable gauge, or on a recorder. Instruments of this kind do not respond to light winds, are inaccurate for high wind readings, and are slow at responding to variable winds. Plate anemometers have been used to trigger high wind alarms on bridges.\n\nJames Lind's anemometer of 1775 consisted of a glass U tube containing a liquid manometer (pressure gauge), with one end bent in a horizontal direction to face the wind and the other vertical end remains parallel to the wind flow. Though the Lind was not the first it was the most practical and best known anemometer of this type. If the wind blows into the mouth of a tube it causes an increase of pressure on one side of the manometer. The wind over the open end of a vertical tube causes little change in pressure on the other side of the manometer. The resulting elevation difference in the two legs of the U tube is an indication of the wind speed. However, an accurate measurement requires that the wind speed be directly into the open end of the tube; small departures from the true direction of the wind causes large variations in the reading.\n\nThe successful metal pressure tube anemometer of William Henry Dines in 1892 utilized the same pressure difference between the open mouth of a straight tube facing the wind and a ring of small holes in a vertical tube which is closed at the upper end. Both are mounted at the same height. The pressure differences on which the action depends are very small, and special means are required to register them. The recorder consists of a float in a sealed chamber partially filled with water. The pipe from the straight tube is connected to the top of the sealed chamber and the pipe from the small tubes is directed into the bottom inside the float. Since the pressure difference determines the vertical position of the float this is a measure of the wind speed.\n\nThe great advantage of the tube anemometer lies in the fact that the exposed part can be mounted on a high pole, and requires no oiling or attention for years; and the registering part can be placed in any convenient position. Two connecting tubes are required. It might appear at first sight as though one connection would serve, but the differences in pressure on which these instruments depend are so minute, that the pressure of the air in the room where the recording part is placed has to be considered. Thus if the instrument depends on the pressure or suction effect alone, and this pressure or suction is measured against the air pressure in an ordinary room, in which the doors and windows are carefully closed and a newspaper is then burnt up the chimney, an effect may be produced equal to a wind of 10 mi/h (16 km/h); and the opening of a window in rough weather, or the opening of a door, may entirely alter the registration.\n\nWhile the Dines anemometer had an error of only 1% at it did not respond very well to low winds due to the poor response of the flat plate vane required to turn the head into the wind. In 1918 an aerodynamic vane with eight times the torque of the flat plate overcame this problem.\n\nModern tube anemometers use the same principle as in the Dines anemometer but using a different design. The implementation uses a pitot-static tube which is a pitot tube with two ports, pitot and static, that is normally used in measuring the airspeed of aircraft. The pitot port measures the dynamic pressure of the open mouth of a tube with pointed head facing wind, and the static port measures the static pressure from small holes along the side on that tube. The pitot tube is connected to a tail so that it always makes the tube's head to face the wind. Additionally, the tube is heated to prevent rime ice formation on the tube. There are two lines from the tube down to the devices to measure the difference in pressure of the two lines. The measurement devices can be manometers, pressure transducers, or analog chart recorders.\n\nIn the tube anemometer the dynamic pressure is actually being measured, although the scale is usually graduated as a velocity scale. If the actual air density differs from the calibration value, due to differing temperature, elevation or barometric pressure, a correction is required to obtain the actual wind speed. Approximately 1.5% (1.6% above 6,000 feet) should be added to the velocity recorded by a tube anemometer for each 1000 ft (5% for each kilometer) above sea-level.\n\nAt airports, it is essential to have accurate wind data under all conditions, including freezing precipitation. Anemometry is also required in monitoring and controlling the operation of wind turbines, which in cold environments are prone to in-cloud icing. Icing alters the aerodynamics of an anemometer and may entirely block it from operating. Therefore, anemometers used in these applications must be internally heated. Both cup anemometers and sonic anemometers are presently available with heated versions.\n\nIn order for wind speeds to be comparable from location to location, the effect of the terrain needs to be considered, especially in regard to height. Other considerations are the presence of trees, and both natural canyons and artificial canyons (urban buildings). The standard anemometer height in open rural terrain is 10 meters.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "2995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2995", "title": "Archaeopteryx", "text": "Archaeopteryx\n\nArchaeopteryx (), sometimes referred to by its German name (\"original bird\" or \"first bird\"), is a genus of bird-like dinosaurs that is transitional between non-avian feathered dinosaurs and modern birds. The name derives from the ancient Greek (\"archaīos\") meaning \"ancient\", and (\"ptéryx\"), meaning \"feather\" or \"wing\". Between the late nineteenth century and the early twenty-first century, \"Archaeopteryx\" had been generally accepted by palaeontologists and popular reference books as the oldest known bird (member of the group Avialae). Older potential avialans have since been identified, including \"Anchiornis\", \"Xiaotingia\", and \"Aurornis\".\n\n\"Archaeopteryx\" lived in the Late Jurassic around 150 million years ago, in what is now southern Germany during a time when Europe was an archipelago of islands in a shallow warm tropical sea, much closer to the equator than it is now. Similar in size to a Eurasian magpie, with the largest individuals possibly attaining the size of a raven, the largest species of \"Archaeopteryx\" could grow to about in length. Despite their small size, broad wings, and inferred ability to fly or glide, \"Archaeopteryx\" had more in common with other small Mesozoic dinosaurs than with modern birds. In particular, they shared the following features with the dromaeosaurids and troodontids: jaws with sharp teeth, three fingers with claws, a long bony tail, hyperextensible second toes (\"killing claw\"), feathers (which also suggest warm-bloodedness), and various features of the skeleton.\n\nThese features make \"Archaeopteryx\" a clear candidate for a transitional fossil between non-avian dinosaurs and birds. Thus, \"Archaeopteryx\" plays an important role, not only in the study of the origin of birds, but in the study of dinosaurs. It was named from a single feather in 1861. That same year, the first complete specimen of \"Archaeopteryx\" was announced. Over the years, ten more fossils of \"Archaeopteryx\" have surfaced. Despite variation among these fossils, most experts regard all the remains that have been discovered as belonging to a single species, although this is still debated.\n\nMost of these eleven fossils include impressions of feathers. Because these feathers are of an advanced form (flight feathers), these fossils are evidence that the evolution of feathers began before the Late Jurassic. The type specimen of \"Archaeopteryx\" was discovered just two years after Charles Darwin published \"On the Origin of Species\". \"Archaeopteryx\" seemed to confirm Darwin's theories and has since become a key piece of evidence for the origin of birds, the transitional fossils debate, and confirmation of evolution.\n\nMost of the specimens of Archaeopteryx that have been discovered come from the Solnhofen limestone in Bavaria, southern Germany, which is a lagerstätte, a rare and remarkable geological formation known for its superbly detailed fossils laid down during the early Tithonian stage of the Jurassic period, approximately 150.8–148.5 million years ago.\n\n\"Archaeopteryx\" was roughly the size of a raven, with broad wings that were rounded at the ends and a long tail compared to its body length. It could reach up to in body length, with an estimated mass of . \"Archaeopteryx\" feathers, although less documented than its other features, were very similar in structure to modern-day bird feathers. Despite the presence of numerous avian features, \"Archaeopteryx\" had many non-avian theropod dinosaur characteristics. Unlike modern birds, \"Archaeopteryx\" had small teeth, as well as a long bony tail, features which \"Archaeopteryx\" shared with other dinosaurs of the time.\n\nBecause it displays features common to both birds and non-avian dinosaurs, \"Archaeopteryx\" has often been considered a link between them. In the 1970s, John Ostrom, following Thomas Henry Huxley's lead in 1868, argued that birds evolved within theropod dinosaurs and \"Archaeopteryx\" was a critical piece of evidence for this argument; it had several avian features, such as a wishbone, flight feathers, wings, and a partially reversed first toe along with dinosaur and theropod features. For instance, it has a long ascending process of the ankle bone, interdental plates, an obturator process of the ischium, and long chevrons in the tail. In particular, Ostrom found that \"Archaeopteryx\" was remarkably similar to the theropod family Dromaeosauridae.\n\nSpecimens of \"Archaeopteryx\" were most notable for their well-developed flight feathers. They were markedly asymmetrical and showed the structure of flight feathers in modern birds, with vanes given stability by a barb-barbule-barbicel arrangement. The tail feathers were less asymmetrical, again in line with the situation in modern birds and also had firm vanes. The thumb did not yet bear a separately movable tuft of stiff feathers.\n\nThe body plumage of \"Archaeopteryx\" is less well documented and has only been properly researched in the well-preserved Berlin specimen. Thus, as more than one species seems to be involved, the research into the Berlin specimen's feathers does not necessarily hold true for the rest of the species of \"Archaeopteryx\". In the Berlin specimen, there are \"trousers\" of well-developed feathers on the legs; some of these feathers seem to have a basic contour feather structure, but are somewhat decomposed (they lack barbicels as in ratites). In part they are firm and thus capable of supporting flight.\n\nA patch of pennaceous feathers is found running along its back, which was quite similar to the contour feathers of the body plumage of modern birds in being symmetrical and firm, although not as stiff as the flight-related feathers. Apart from that, the feather traces in the Berlin specimen are limited to a sort of \"proto-down\" not dissimilar to that found in the dinosaur \"Sinosauropteryx\": decomposed and fluffy, and possibly even appearing more like fur than feathers in life (although not in their microscopic structure). These occur on the remainder of the body—although some feathers did not fossilize and others were obliterated during preparation, leaving bare patches on specimens—and the lower neck.\n\nThere is no indication of feathering on the upper neck and head. While these conceivably may have been nude, this may still be an artefact of preservation. It appears that most \"Archaeopteryx\" specimens became embedded in anoxic sediment after drifting some time on their backs in the sea—the head, neck and the tail are generally bent downward, which suggests that the specimens had just started to rot when they were embedded, with tendons and muscle relaxing so that the characteristic shape (death pose) of the fossil specimens was achieved. This would mean that the skin already was softened and loose, which is bolstered by the fact that in some specimens the flight feathers were starting to detach at the point of embedding in the sediment. So it is hypothesized that the pertinent specimens moved along the sea bed in shallow water for some time before burial, the head and upper neck feathers sloughing off, while the more firmly attached tail feathers remained.\n\nIn 2011, graduate student Ryan Carney and colleagues performed the first colour study on an \"Archaeopteryx\" specimen. Using scanning electron microscopy technology and energy-dispersive X-ray analysis, the team was able to detect the structure of melanosomes in the single-feather specimen described in 1861. The resultant structure was then compared to that of 87 modern bird species and was determined with a highest likelihood to be black. The feather studied was most probably a single covert, which would have partly covered the primary feathers on the wings. The study does not mean that \"Archaeopteryx\" was entirely black, but suggests that it had some black colouration which included the coverts. Carney pointed out that this is consistent with what we know of modern flight characteristics, in that black melanosomes have structural properties that strengthen feathers for flight. In a 2013 study published in the \"Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry\", new analyses of \"Archaeopteryx\"'s feathers revealed that the animal may have had complex light- and dark-coloured plumage, with heavier pigmentation in the distal tips and outer vanes. In a press release, Carney argued against this interpretation and one of his colleagues also brought up the subject in a review paper however, no new evidence was published.\n\nAs in the wings of modern birds, the flight feathers of \"Archaeopteryx\" were somewhat asymmetrical and the tail feathers were rather broad. This implies that the wings and tail were used for lift generation, but it is unclear whether \"Archaeopteryx\" was capable of flapping flight or simply a glider. The lack of a bony breastbone suggests that \"Archaeopteryx\" was not a very strong flier, but flight muscles might have attached to the thick, boomerang-shaped wishbone, the platelike coracoids, or perhaps, to a cartilaginous sternum. The sideways orientation of the glenoid (shoulder) joint between scapula, coracoid, and humerus—instead of the dorsally angled arrangement found in modern birds—may indicate that \"Archaeopteryx\" was unable to lift its wings above its back, a requirement for the upstroke found in modern flapping flight. According to a study by Philip Senter in 2006, \"Archaeopteryx\" was indeed unable to use flapping flight as modern birds do, but it may well have used a downstroke-only flap-assisted gliding technique.\n\n\"Archaeopteryx\" wings were relatively large, which would have resulted in a low stall speed and reduced turning radius. The short and rounded shape of the wings would have increased drag, but also could have improved its ability to fly through cluttered environments such as trees and brush (similar wing shapes are seen in birds that fly through trees and brush, such as crows and pheasants). The presence of \"hind wings\", asymmetrical flight feathers stemming from the legs similar to those seen in dromaeosaurids such as \"Microraptor\", also would have added to the aerial mobility of \"Archaeopteryx\". The first detailed study of the hind wings by Longrich in 2006, suggested that the structures formed up to 12% of the total airfoil. This would have reduced stall speed by up to 6% and turning radius by up to 12%.\n\nThe feathers of \"Archaeopteryx\" were asymmetrical. This has been interpreted as evidence that it was a flyer, because flightless birds tend to have symmetrical feathers. Some scientists, including Thomson and Speakman, have questioned this. They studied more than 70 families of living birds, and found that some flightless types do have a range of asymmetry in their feathers, and that the feathers of \"Archaeopteryx\" fall into this range. The degree of asymmetry seen in \"Archaeopteryx\" is more typical for slow flyers than for flightless birds.\n\nIn 2010, Robert L. Nudds and Gareth J. Dyke in the journal \"Science\" published a paper in which they analysed the rachises of the primary feathers of \"Confuciusornis\" and \"Archaeopteryx\". The analysis suggested that the rachises on these two genera were thinner and weaker than those of modern birds relative to body mass. The authors determined that \"Archaeopteryx\" and \"Confuciusornis\", were unable to use flapping flight. This study was criticized by Philip J. Currie and Luis Chiappe. Chiappe suggested that it is difficult to measure the rachises of fossilized feathers, and Currie speculated that \"Archaeopteryx\" and \"Confuciusornis\" must have been able to fly to some degree, as their fossils are preserved in what is believed to have been marine or lake sediments, suggesting that they must have been able to fly over deep water. Gregory Paul also disagreed with the study, arguing in a 2010 response that Nudds and Dyke had overestimated the masses of these early birds, and that more accurate mass estimates allowed powered flight even with relatively narrow rachises. Nudds and Dyke had assumed a mass of for the Munich specimen \"Archaeopteryx\", a young juvenile, based on published mass estimates of larger specimens. Paul argued that a more reasonable body mass estimate for the Munich specimen is about . Paul also criticized the measurements of the rachises themselves, noting that the feathers in the Munich specimen are poorly preserved. Nudds and Dyke reported a diameter of for the longest primary feather, which Paul could not confirm using photographs. Paul measured some of the inner primary feathers, finding rachises across. Despite these criticisms, Nudds and Dyke stood by their original conclusions. They claimed that Paul's statement, that an adult \"Archaeopteryx\" would have been a better flyer than the juvenile Munich specimen, was dubious. This, they reasoned, would require an even thicker rachis, evidence for which has not yet been presented. Another possibility is that they had not achieved true flight, but instead used their wings as aids for extra lift while running over water after the fashion of the basilisk lizard, which could explain their presence in lake and marine deposits (see Evolution of bird flight).\n\nIn 2004, scientists analysing a detailed CT scan of the braincase of the London \"Archaeopteryx\" concluded that its brain was significantly larger than that of most dinosaurs, indicating that it possessed the brain size necessary for flying. The overall brain anatomy was reconstructed using the scan. The reconstruction showed that the regions associated with vision took up nearly one-third of the brain. Other well-developed areas involved hearing and muscle coordination. The skull scan also revealed the structure of its inner ear. The structure more closely resembles that of modern birds than the inner ear of non-avian reptiles. These characteristics taken together suggest that \"Archaeopteryx\" had the keen sense of hearing, balance, spatial perception, and coordination needed to fly. \"Archaeopteryx\" had a cerebrum-to-brain-volume ratio 78% of the way to modern birds from the condition of non-coelurosaurian dinosaurs such as \"Carcharodontosaurus\" or \"Allosaurus\", which had a crocodile-like anatomy of the brain and inner ear. Newer research shows that while the \"Archaeopteryx\" brain was more complex than that of more primitive theropods, it had a more generalized brain volume among maniraptoran dinosaurs, even smaller than that of other non-avian dinosaurs in several instances, which indicates the neurological development required for flight was already a common trait in the maniraptoran clade.\n\nRecent studies of flight feather barb geometry reveal that modern birds possess a larger barb angle in the trailing vane of the feather, whereas \"Archaeopteryx\" lacks this large barb angle, indicating potentially weak flight abilities.\n\n\"Archaeopteryx\" continues to play an important part in scientific debates about the origin and evolution of birds. Some scientists see it as a semi-arboreal climbing animal, following the idea that birds evolved from tree-dwelling gliders (the \"trees down\" hypothesis for the evolution of flight proposed by O. C. Marsh). Other scientists see \"Archaeopteryx\" as running quickly along the ground, supporting the idea that birds evolved flight by running (the \"ground up\" hypothesis proposed by Samuel Wendell Williston). Still others suggest that \"Archaeopteryx\" might have been at home both in the trees and on the ground, like modern crows, and this latter view is what currently is considered best-supported by morphological characters. Altogether, it appears that the species was not particularly specialized for running on the ground or for perching. A scenario outlined by Elżanowski in 2002 suggested that \"Archaeopteryx\" used its wings mainly to escape predators by glides punctuated with shallow downstrokes to reach successively higher perches, and alternatively, to cover longer distances (mainly) by gliding down from cliffs or treetops.\n\nA histological study by Erickson, Norell, Zhongue, and others in 2009 estimated that \"Archaeopteryx\" grew relatively slowly compared to modern birds, presumably because the outermost portions of \"Archaeopteryx\" bones appear poorly vascularized; in living vertebrates poorly vascularized bone is correlated with slow growth rate. They also assume that all known skeletons of \"Archaeopteryx\" come from juvenile specimens. Because the bones of \"Archaeopteryx\" could not be histologically sectioned in a formal skeletochronological (growth ring) analysis, Erickson and colleagues used bone vascularity (porosity) to estimate bone growth rate. They assumed that poorly vascularized bone grows at similar rates in all birds and in \"Archaeopteryx\". The poorly vascularized bone of \"Archaeopteryx\" might have grown as slowly as that in a mallard (2.5 micrometres per day) or as fast as that in an ostrich (4.2 micrometres per day). Using this range of bone growth rates, they calculated how long it would take to \"grow\" each specimen of \"Archaeopteryx\" to the observed size; it may have taken at least 970 days (there were 375 days in a Late Jurassic year) to reach an adult size of . The study also found that the avialans \"Jeholornis\" and \"Sapeornis\" grew relatively slowly, as did the dromaeosaurid \"Mahakala\". The avialans \"Confuciusornis\" and \"Ichthyornis\" grew relatively quickly, following a growth trend similar to that of modern birds. One of the few modern birds that exhibit slow growth is the flightless kiwi, and the authors speculated that \"Archaeopteryx\" and the kiwi had similar basal metabolic rate.\n\nComparisons between the scleral rings of \"Archaeopteryx\" and modern birds and reptiles indicate that it may have been diurnal, similar to most modern birds.\n\nThe richness and diversity of the Solnhofen limestones in which all specimens of \"Archaeopteryx\" have been found have shed light on an ancient Jurassic Bavaria strikingly different from the present day. The latitude was similar to Florida, though the climate was likely to have been drier, as evidenced by fossils of plants with adaptations for arid conditions and a lack of terrestrial sediments characteristic of rivers. Evidence of plants, although scarce, include cycads and conifers while animals found include a large number of insects, small lizards, pterosaurs, and \"Compsognathus\".\n\nThe excellent preservation of \"Archaeopteryx\" fossils and other terrestrial fossils found at Solnhofen indicates that they did not travel far before becoming preserved. The \"Archaeopteryx\" specimens found were therefore likely to have lived on the low islands surrounding the Solnhofen lagoon rather than to have been corpses that drifted in from farther away. \"Archaeopteryx\" skeletons are considerably less numerous in the deposits of Solnhofen than those of pterosaurs, of which seven genera have been found. The pterosaurs included species such as \"Rhamphorhynchus\" belonging to the Rhamphorhynchidae, the group which dominated the niche currently occupied by seabirds, and which became extinct at the end of the Jurassic. The pterosaurs, which also included \"Pterodactylus\", were common enough that it is unlikely that the specimens found are vagrants from the larger islands to the north.\n\nThe islands that surrounded the Solnhofen lagoon were low lying, semi-arid, and sub-tropical with a long dry season and little rain. The closest modern analogue for the Solnhofen conditions is said to be Orca Basin in the northern Gulf of Mexico, although it is much deeper than the Solnhofen lagoons. The flora of these islands was adapted to these dry conditions and consisted mostly of low () shrubs. Contrary to reconstructions of \"Archaeopteryx\" climbing large trees, these seem to have been mostly absent from the islands; few trunks have been found in the sediments and fossilized tree pollen also is absent.\n\nThe lifestyle of \"Archaeopteryx\" is difficult to reconstruct and there are several theories regarding it. Some researchers suggest that it was primarily adapted to life on the ground, while other researchers suggest that it was principally arboreal. The absence of trees does not preclude \"Archaeopteryx\" from an arboreal lifestyle, as several species of bird live exclusively in low shrubs. Various aspects of the morphology of \"Archaeopteryx\" point to either an arboreal or ground existence, including the length of its legs and the elongation in its feet; some authorities consider it likely to have been a generalist capable of feeding in both shrubs and open ground, as well as along the shores of the lagoon. It most likely hunted small prey, seizing it with its jaws if it was small enough, or with its claws if it was larger.\n\nOver the years, twelve body fossil specimens of \"Archaeopteryx\" and a feather that may belong to it have been found. All of the fossils come from the limestone deposits, quarried for centuries, near Solnhofen, Germany.\nThe initial discovery, a single feather, was unearthed in 1860 or 1861 and described in 1861 by Hermann von Meyer. It is currently located at the Humboldt Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin. This is generally assigned to \"Archaeopteryx\" and was the initial holotype, but whether it is a feather of this species, or another, as yet undiscovered, proto-bird is unknown. There are some indications it is not from the same animal as most of the skeletons (the \"typical\" \"A. lithographica\").\n\nThe first skeleton, known as the London Specimen (BMNH 37001), was unearthed in 1861 near Langenaltheim, Germany, and perhaps given to local physician Karl Häberlein in return for medical services. He then sold it for £700 to the Natural History Museum in London, where it remains. Missing most of its head and neck, it was described in 1863 by Richard Owen as \"Archaeopteryx macrura\", allowing for the possibility it did not belong to the same species as the feather. In the subsequent fourth edition of his \"On the Origin of Species\", Charles Darwin described how some authors had maintained \"that the whole class of birds came suddenly into existence during the eocene period; but now we know, on the authority of professor Owen, that a bird certainly lived during the deposition of the upper greensand; and still more recently, that strange bird, the \"Archaeopteryx\", with a long lizard-like tail, bearing a pair of feathers on each joint, and with its wings furnished with two free claws, has been discovered in the oolitic slates of Solnhofen. Hardly any recent discovery shows more forcibly than this how little we as yet know of the former inhabitants of the world.\"\n\nThe Greek term \"pteryx\" () primarily means \"wing\", but can also designate merely \"feather\". Meyer suggested this in his description. At first he referred to a single feather which appeared to resemble a modern bird's remex (wing feather), but he had heard of and been shown a rough sketch of the London specimen, to which he referred as a \"\"Skelett eines mit ähnlichen Federn bedeckten \"\" (\"skeleton of an animal covered in similar feathers\"). In German, this ambiguity is resolved by the term \"Schwinge\" which does not necessarily mean a wing used for flying. \"Urschwinge\" was the favoured translation of \"Archaeopteryx\" among German scholars in the late nineteenth century. In English, \"ancient pinion\" offers a rough approximation.\n\nSince then twelve specimens have been recovered:\n\nThe Berlin Specimen (HMN 1880/81) was discovered in 1874 or 1875 on the Blumenberg near Eichstätt, Germany, by farmer Jakob Niemeyer. He sold this precious fossil for the money to buy a cow in 1876, to innkeeper Johann Dörr, who again sold it to Ernst Otto Häberlein, the son of K. Häberlein. Placed on sale between 1877 and 1881, with potential buyers including O. C. Marsh of Yale University's Peabody Museum, it eventually was bought for 20,000 Goldmark by the Humboldt Museum für Naturkunde, where it now is displayed. The transaction was financed by Ernst Werner von Siemens, founder of the famous company that bears his name. Described in 1884 by Wilhelm Dames, it is the most complete specimen, and the first with a complete head. In 1897 it was named by Dames as a new species, \"A. siemensii\"; though often considered a synonym of \"A. lithographica\", several 21st century studies have concluded that it is a distinct species which includes the Berlin, Munich, and Thermopolis specimens.\n\nComposed of a torso, the Maxberg Specimen (S5) was discovered in 1956 near Langenaltheim; it was brought to the attention of professor Florian Heller in 1958 and described by him in 1959. The specimen is missing its head and tail, although the rest of the skeleton is mostly intact. Although it was once exhibited at the Maxberg Museum in Solnhofen, it is currently missing. It belonged to Eduard Opitsch, who loaned it to the museum until 1974. After his death in 1991, it was discovered that the specimen was missing and may have been stolen or sold.\n\nThe Haarlem Specimen (TM 6428/29, also known as the \"Teyler Specimen\") was discovered in 1855 near Riedenburg, Germany, and described as a \"Pterodactylus crassipes\" in 1857 by Meyer. It was reclassified in 1970 by John Ostrom and is currently located at the Teylers Museum in Haarlem, Netherlands. It was the very first specimen found, but was incorrectly classified at the time. It is also one of the least complete specimens, consisting mostly of limb bones, isolated cervical vertebrae, and ribs.\n\nThe Eichstätt Specimen (JM 2257) was discovered in 1951 near Workerszell, Germany, and described by Peter Wellnhofer in 1974. Currently located at the Jura Museum in Eichstätt, Germany, it is the smallest known specimen and has the second best head. It is possibly a separate genus (\"Jurapteryx recurva\") or species (\"A. recurva\").\n\nThe Solnhofen Specimen (unnumbered specimen) was discovered in the 1970s near Eichstätt, Germany, and described in 1988 by Wellnhofer. Currently located at the Bürgermeister-Müller-Museum in Solnhofen, it originally was classified as \"Compsognathus\" by an amateur collector, the same mayor Friedrich Müller after which the museum is named. It is the largest specimen known and may belong to a separate genus and species, \"Wellnhoferia grandis\". It is missing only portions of the neck, tail, backbone, and head.\n\nThe Munich Specimen (BSP 1999 I 50, formerly known as the \"Solenhofer-Aktien-Verein Specimen\") was discovered on 3 August 1992 near Langenaltheim and described in 1993 by Wellnhofer. It is currently located at the Paläontologisches Museum München in Munich, to which it was sold in 1999 for 1.9 million Deutschmark. What was initially believed to be a bony sternum turned out to be part of the coracoid, but a cartilaginous sternum may have been present. Only the front of its face is missing. It has been used as the basis for a distinct species, \"A. bavarica\", but more recent studies suggest it belongs to \"A. siemensii\".\n\nAn eighth, fragmentary specimen was discovered in 1990, not in Solnhofen limestone, but in somewhat younger sediments at Daiting, Suevia. Therefore, it is known as the Daiting Specimen, and had been known since 1996 only from a cast, briefly shown at the Naturkundemuseum in Bamberg. The original was purchased by palaeontologist Raimund Albertsdörfer in 2009. It was on display for the first time with six other original fossils of \"Archaeopteryx\" at the Munich Mineral Show in October 2009. A first, quick look by scientists indicates that this specimen might represent a new species of \"Archaeopteryx\". It was found in a limestone bed that was a few hundred thousand years younger than the other finds.\n\nAnother fragmentary fossil was found in 2000. It is in private possession and, since 2004, on loan to the Bürgermeister-Müller Museum in Solnhofen, so it is called the Bürgermeister-Müller Specimen; the institute itself officially refers to it as the \"Exemplar of the families Ottman & Steil, Solnhofen\". As the fragment represents the remains of a single wing of \"Archaeopteryx\", the popular name of this fossil is \"chicken wing\".\n\nLong in a private collection in Switzerland, the Thermopolis Specimen (WDC CSG 100) was discovered in Bavaria and described in 2005 by Mayr, Pohl, and Peters. Donated to the Wyoming Dinosaur Center in Thermopolis, Wyoming, it has the best-preserved head and feet; most of the neck and the lower jaw have not been preserved. The \"Thermopolis\" specimen was described in 2 December 2005 \"Science\" journal article as \"A well-preserved \"Archaeopteryx\" specimen with theropod features\"; it shows that \"Archaeopteryx\" lacked a reversed toe—a universal feature of birds—limiting its ability to perch on branches and implying a terrestrial or trunk-climbing lifestyle. This has been interpreted as evidence of theropod ancestry. In 1988, Gregory S. Paul claimed to have found evidence of a hyperextensible second toe, but this was not verified and accepted by other scientists until the Thermopolis specimen was described. \"Until now, the feature was thought to belong only to the species' close relatives, the deinonychosaurs.\" The Thermopolis Specimen was assigned to \"Archaeopteryx siemensii\" in 2007. The specimen is considered to represent the most complete and best-preserved \"Archaeopteryx\" remains yet.\n\nThe discovery of an eleventh specimen was announced in 2011, and it was described in 2014. It is one of the more complete specimens, but is missing much of the skull and one forelimb. It is privately owned and has yet to be given a name.\nPalaeontologists of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich studied the specimen, which revealed previously unknown features of the plumage, such as feathers on both the upper and lower legs and metatarsus, and the only preserved tail tip.\n\nA twelfth specimen had been discovered by amateur collectors in 2010 at the Schamhaupten quarry, but the finding was only announced in February 2014. It is as yet not scientifically described.\n\nToday, fossils of the genus \"Archaeopteryx\" are usually assigned to one or two species, \"A. lithographica\" and \"A. siemensii\", but their taxonomic history is complicated. Dozens of names have been published for the handful of specimens, most of which are simply spelling errors (\"lapsus\"). As interpreted today, the name \"A. lithographica\" only referred to the single feather described by Meyer. In 1954 Gavin de Beer concluded that the London specimen was the holotype. In 1960, Swinton accordingly proposed that the name \"Archaeopteryx lithographica\" be placed on the official genera list making the alternative names \"Griphosaurus\" and \"Griphornis\" invalid. The ICZN, implicitly accepting de Beer's standpoint, did indeed suppress the plethora of alternative names initially proposed for the first skeleton specimens, which mainly resulted from the acrimonious dispute between Meyer and his opponent Johann Andreas Wagner (whose \"Griphosaurus problematicus\" – \"problematic riddle-lizard\" – was a vitriolic sneer at Meyer's \"Archaeopteryx\"). In addition, in 1977 the first specific name of the Haarlem specimen, \"crassipes\", described by Meyer as a pterosaur before its true nature was realized, also was suppressed.\n\nIt has been noted that the feather, the first specimen of \"Archaeopteryx\" described, does not correspond well with the flight-related feathers of \"Archaeopteryx\". It certainly is a flight feather of a contemporary species, but its size and proportions indicate that it may belong to another, smaller species of feathered theropod, of which only this feather is known so far. As the feather had been designated the type specimen, the name \"Archaeopteryx\" should then no longer be applied to the skeletons, thus creating significant nomenclatorial confusion. In 2007, two sets of scientists therefore petitioned the ICZN requesting that the London specimen explicitly be made the type by designating it as the new holotype specimen, or neotype. This suggestion was upheld by the ICZN after four years of debate, and the London specimen was designated the neotype on 3 October 2011.\n\nBelow is a cladogram published in 2013 by Godefroit \"et al.\"\n\nIt has been argued that all the specimens belong to the same species, \"A. lithographica\". Differences do exist among the specimens, and while some researchers regard these as due to the different ages of the specimens, some may be related to actual species diversity. In particular, the Munich, Eichstätt, Solnhofen, and Thermopolis specimens differ from the London, Berlin, and Haarlem specimens in being smaller or much larger, having different finger proportions, having more slender snouts lined with forward-pointing teeth, and possible presence of a sternum. Due to these differences, most individual specimens have been given their own species name at one point or another. The Berlin specimen has been designated as \"Archaeornis siemensii\", the Eichstätt specimen as \"Jurapteryx recurva\", the Munich specimen as \"Archaeopteryx bavarica\", and the Solnhofen specimen as \"Wellnhoferia grandis\".\n\nIn 2007, a review of all well-preserved specimens including the then-newly discovered Thermopolis specimen concluded that two distinct species of \"Archaeopteryx\" could be supported: \"A. lithographica\" (consisting of at least the London and Solnhofen specimens), and \"A. siemensii\" (consisting of at least the Berlin, Munich, and Thermopolis specimens). The two species are distinguished primarily by large flexor tubercles on the foot claws in \"A. lithographica\" (the claws of \"A. siemensii\" specimens being relatively simple and straight). \"A. lithographica\" also had a constricted portion of the crown in some teeth and a stouter metatarsus. A supposed additional species, \"Wellnhoferia grandis\" (based on the Solnhofen specimen), seems to be indistinguishable from \"A. lithographica\" except in its larger size.\n\nIf two names are given, the first denotes the original describer of the \"species\", the second the author on whom the given name combination is based. As always in zoological nomenclature, putting an author's name in parentheses denotes that the taxon was originally described in a different genus.\n\n\"\"Archaeopteryx\" vicensensis\" (Anon. \"fide\" Lambrecht, 1933) is a \"nomen nudum\" for what appears to be an undescribed pterosaur.\n\nBeginning in 1985, a group including astronomer Fred Hoyle and physicist Lee Spetner published a series of papers claiming that the feathers on the Berlin and London specimens of \"Archaeopteryx\" were forged. Their claims were repudiated by Alan J. Charig and others at the Natural History Museum in London. Most of their evidence for a forgery was based on unfamiliarity with the processes of lithification; for example, they proposed that, based on the difference in texture associated with the feathers, feather impressions were applied to a thin layer of cement, without realizing that feathers themselves would have caused a textural difference. They also misinterpreted the fossils, claiming that the tail was forged as one large feather, when visibly this is not the case. In addition, they claimed that the other specimens of \"Archaeopteryx\" known at the time did not have feathers, which is incorrect; the Maxberg and Eichstätt specimens have obvious feathers.\n\nThey also expressed disbelief that slabs would split so smoothly, or that one half of a slab containing fossils would have good preservation, but not the counterslab. These are common properties of Solnhofen fossils, because the dead animals would fall onto hardened surfaces, which would form a natural plane for the future slabs to split along and would leave the bulk of the fossil on one side and little on the other.\n\nFinally, the motives they suggested for a forgery are not strong, and are contradictory; one is that Richard Owen wanted to forge evidence in support of Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, which is unlikely given Owen's views toward Darwin and his theory. The other is that Owen wanted to set a trap for Darwin, hoping the latter would support the fossils so Owen could discredit him with the forgery; this is unlikely because Owen wrote a detailed paper on the London specimen, so such an action would certainly backfire.\n\nCharig \"et al.\" pointed to the presence of hairline cracks in the slabs running through both rock and fossil impressions, and mineral growth over the slabs that had occurred before discovery and preparation, as evidence that the feathers were original. Spetner \"et al.\" then attempted to show that the cracks would have propagated naturally through their postulated cement layer, but neglected to account for the fact that the cracks were old and had been filled with calcite, and thus were not able to propagate. They also attempted to show the presence of cement on the London specimen through X-ray spectroscopy, and did find something that was not rock; it was not cement either, and is most probably a fragment of silicone rubber left behind when moulds were made of the specimen. Their suggestions have not been taken seriously by palaeontologists, as their evidence was largely based on misunderstandings of geology, and they never discussed the other feather-bearing specimens, which have increased in number since then. Charig \"et al.\" reported a discolouration: a dark band between two layers of limestone – they say it is the product of sedimentation. It is natural for limestone to take on the colour of its surroundings and most limestones are coloured (if not colour banded) to some degree, so the darkness was attributed to such impurities. They also mention that a complete absence of air bubbles in the rock slabs is further proof that the specimen is authentic.\n\nModern paleontology has often classified \"Archaeopteryx\" as the most primitive bird. It is not thought to be a true ancestor of modern birds, but rather, a close relative of that ancestor. Nonetheless, \"Archaeopteryx\" was often used as a model of the true ancestral bird. Several authors have done so. Lowe (1935) and Thulborn (1984) questioned whether \"Archaeopteryx\" truly was the first bird. They suggested that \"Archaeopteryx\" was a dinosaur that was no more closely related to birds than were other dinosaur groups. Kurzanov (1987) suggested that \"Avimimus\" was more likely to be the ancestor of all birds than \"Archaeopteryx\". Barsbold (1983) and Zweers and Van den Berge (1997) noted that many maniraptoran lineages are extremely birdlike, and they suggested that different groups of birds may have descended from different dinosaur ancestors.\n\nThe discovery of the closely related \"Xiaotingia\" in 2011 led to new phylogenetic analyses that suggested that \"Archaeopteryx\" is a deinonychosaur rather than an avialan, and therefore, not a \"bird\" under most common uses of that term. A more thorough analysis was published soon after to test this hypothesis, and failed to arrive at the same result; it found \"Archaeopteryx\" in its traditional position at the base of Avialae, while \"Xiaotingia\" was recovered as a basal dromaeosaurid or troodontid. The authors of the follow-up study noted that uncertainties still exist, and that it may not be possible to state confidently whether or not \"Archaeopteryx\" is a member of Avialae or not, barring new and better specimens of relevant species.\n\nPhylogenetic studies conducted by Senter, \"et al.\" (2012) and Turner, Makovicky, and Norell (2012) confirmed that \"Archaeopteryx\" was more closely related to living birds than to dromaeosaurids and troodontids. On the other hand, Godefroit, \"et al.\" (2013) recovered \"Archaeopteryx\" as more closely related to dromaeosaurids and troodontids in the analysis included in their description of \"Eosinopteryx brevipenna\". The authors used a modified version of the matrix from the study describing \"Xiaotingia\", adding \"Jinfengopteryx elegans\" and \"Eosinopteryx brevipenna\" to it, as well as adding four additional characters related to the development of the plumage. Unlike the analysis from the description of \"Xiaotingia\", the analysis conducted by Godefroit, \"et al.\" did not find \"Archaeopteryx\" to be related particularly closely to \"Anchiornis\" and \"Xiaotingia\", which were recovered as basal troodontids instead.\n\nAgnolín and Novas (2013) found \"Archaeopteryx\" and (possibly synonymous) \"Wellnhoferia\" to be the basalmost avialans (Avialae being defined by the authors as including \"Archaeopteryx lithographica\" and \"Passer\", their most recent common ancestor and all of its descendants), with Microraptoria, Unenlagiinae, and the clade containing \"Anchiornis\" and \"Xiaotingia\" being successively closer outgroups to the Avialae. Another phylogenetic study by Godefroit, \"et al.\", using a more inclusive matrix than the one from the analysis in the description of \"Eosinopteryx brevipenna\", also found \"Archaeopteryx\" to be a member of Avialae (defined by the authors as the most inclusive clade containing \"Passer domesticus\", but not \"Dromaeosaurus albertensis\" or \"Troodon formosus\"). \"Archaeopteryx\" was found to form a grade at the base of Avialae with \"Xiaotingia\", \"Anchiornis\", and \"Aurornis\". Compared to \"Archaeopteryx\", \"Xiaotingia\" was found to be more closely related to extant birds, while both \"Anchiornis\" and \"Aurornis\" were found to be more distantly so.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "2999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2999", "title": "Arthur Laurents", "text": "Arthur Laurents\n\nArthur Laurents (July 14, 1917 – May 5, 2011) was an American playwright, stage director and screenwriter.\n\nAfter writing scripts for radio shows after college and then training films for the U.S. Army during World War II, Laurents turned to writing for Broadway, producing a body of work that includes \"West Side Story\" (1957), \"\" (1959), and \"Hallelujah, Baby!\" (1967), and directing some of his own shows and other Broadway productions.\n\nHis early film scripts include \"Rope\" (1948) for Alfred Hitchcock, followed by \"Anastasia\" (1956), \"Bonjour Tristesse\" (1958), \"The Way We Were\" (1973), and \"The Turning Point\" (1977).\n\nBorn Arthur Levine, Laurents was the son of middle-class Jewish parents, a lawyer and a schoolteacher who gave up her career when she married. He was born and raised in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, a borough of New York City, New York, the elder of two children, and attended Erasmus Hall High School. His sister Edith suffered from chorea as a child.\n\nHis paternal grandparents were Orthodox Jews, and his mother's parents, although born Jewish, were atheists. His mother kept a kosher home for her husband's sake, but was lax about attending synagogue and observing the Jewish holidays. His Bar Mitzvah marked the end of Laurents's religious education and the beginning of his rejection of all fundamentalist religions, although he continued to identify himself as Jewish. However, late in life he admitted to having changed his last name from Levine to the less Jewish-sounding Laurents, \"to get a job.\"\n\nAfter graduating from Cornell University, Laurents took an evening class in radio writing at New York University. William N. Robson, his instructor, a CBS Radio director/producer, submitted his script \"Now Playing Tomorrow\", a comedic fantasy about clairvoyance, to the network, and it was produced in the Columbia Workshop series on January 30, 1939, with Shirley Booth in the lead role. It was Laurents' first professional credit. The show's success led to him being hired to write scripts for various radio shows, among them \"Lux Radio Theater\". Laurents' career was interrupted when he was drafted into the U.S. Army in the middle of World War II. Through a series of clerical errors, he never saw battle, but instead was assigned to the U.S. Army Pictorial Service located in a film studio in Astoria, Queens, where he wrote training films and met, among others, George Cukor and William Holden. He later was reassigned to write plays for \"Armed Service Force Presents\", a radio show that dramatized the contributions of all branches of the armed forces.\n\nAccording to John Clum, \"Laurents was always a mirror of his times. Through his best work, one sees a staged history of leftist, gender, and gay politics in the decades after World War II.\" After graduating from Cornell University in 1937, Laurents went to work as a writer for radio drama at CBS in New York. His military duties during World War II, which consisted of writing training films and radio scripts for \"Armed Service Force Presents\", brought him into contact with some of the best film directors—distinguished director George Cukor directed his first script. Laurents’s work in radio and film during World War II was an excellent apprenticeship for a budding playwright and screenwriter. He also had the good fortune to be based in New York City. His first stage play, \"Home of the Brave\", was produced in 1945. The sale of the play to a film studio gave Laurents the entrée he needed to become a Hollywood screenwriter though he continued, with mixed success, to write plays. The most important of his early screenplays is his adaptation of \"Rope\" for Alfred Hitchcock.\n\nSoon after being discharged from the Army, Laurents met ballerina Nora Kaye, and the two became involved in an on-again, off-again romantic relationship. While Kaye was on tour with \"Fancy Free\", Laurents continued to write for the radio but was becoming discontented with the medium. At the urging of Martin Gabel, he spent nine consecutive nights writing a play In 1962, Laurents directed \"I Can Get It for You Wholesale\", which helped to turn then-unknown Barbra Streisand into a star. His next project was the stage musical \"Anyone Can Whistle\", which he directed and for which he wrote the book, but it proved to be an infamous flop. He later had success with the musicals \"Hallelujah, Baby!\" (written for Lena Horne but ultimately starring Leslie Uggams) and \"La Cage Aux Folles\" (1983), which he directed, but \"Nick & Nora\" was another flop.\n\nIn 2008, Laurents directed a Broadway revival of \"Gypsy\" starring Patti LuPone, and in 2009, he tackled a bilingual revival of \"West Side Story\", with Spanish translations of some dialogue and lyrics by Lin-Manuel Miranda. While preparing \"West Side Story\", he noted, \"The musical theatre and cultural conventions of 1957 made it next to impossible for the characters to have authenticity.\" Following the production's March 19 opening at the Palace Theatre, Ben Brantley of \"The New York Times\" called the translations \"an only partly successful experiment\" and added, \"Mr. Laurents has exchanged insolence for innocence and, as with most such bargains, there are dividends and losses.\" The production is on a national tour (2011-2012) with direction by David Saint, who was Laurents' assistant director on the Broadway production. The Spanish lyrics and dialog have been reduced from about 18% of the total to about 10%.\n\nLaurents' first Hollywood experience proved to be a frustrating disappointment. Unhappy with the script for \"The Snake Pit\" (1948), submitted by Frank Partos and Millen Brand, director Anatole Litvak hired Laurents to rewrite it. Partos and Brand later insisted the bulk of the shooting script was theirs, and produced carbon copies of many of the pages Laurents actually had written to bolster their claim. Having destroyed the original script and all his notes and rewritten pages after completing the project, Laurents had no way to prove most of the work was his, and the Writers Guild of America denied him screen credit. Brand later confessed he and Partos had copied scenes written by Laurents and apologized for his role in the deception. Four decades later, Laurents learned he was ineligible for WGA health benefits because he had failed to accumulate enough credits to qualify. He was short by one, the one he failed to get for \"The Snake Pit\".\n\nUpon hearing 20th Century Fox executives were pleased with Laurents' work on \"The Snake Pit\", Alfred Hitchcock hired him for his next project, the film \"Rope\" starring James Stewart. Hitchcock wanted Laurents to Americanize the British play \"Rope\" (1929) by Patrick Hamilton for the screen. With his then-lover Farley Granger set to star, Laurents was happy to accept the assignment. His dilemma was how to make the audience aware of the fact the three main characters were homosexual without blatantly saying so. The Hays Office kept close tabs on his work, and the final script was so discreet that Laurents was unsure whether co-star James Stewart ever realized that his character was gay. In later years, Hitchcock asked him to script both \"Torn Curtain\" (1966) and \"Topaz\" (1969), However, Laurents, in both cases unenthused by the material, declined the offers.\n\nLaurents also scripted \"Anastasia\" (1956) and \"Bonjour Tristesse\" (1958). \"The Way We Were\" (1973), in which he incorporated many of his own experiences, particularly those with the HUAC, reunited him with Barbra Streisand, and \"The Turning Point\" (1977), inspired in part by his love for Nora Kaye, was directed by her husband Herbert Ross. The Fox animated feature film \"Anastasia\" (1997) was based in part from his screenplay of the live-action 1956 film of the same title.\n\nBecause of a casual remark made by Russel Crouse, Laurents was called to Washington, D.C., to account for his political views. He explained himself to the House Un-American Activities Committee, and his appearance had no obvious impact on his career, which at the time was primarily in the theatre. When the McCarran Internal Security Act, which prohibited individuals suspected of engaging in subversive activities from obtaining a passport, was passed in 1950, Laurents and Granger immediately applied for and received passports and departed for Paris with Harold Clurman and his wife Stella Adler. Laurents and Granger remained abroad, traveling throughout Europe and northern Africa, for about 18 months.\n\nYears earlier, Laurents and Jerome Robbins had developed \"Look Ma, I'm Dancin'!\" (1948), a stage musical about the world of ballet that ran for 188 performances on Broadway, and starred Nancy Walker and Harold Lang. (Although the musical was ultimately produced with a book by Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee, as Laurents left the project.) Robbins approached Paramount Pictures about directing a screen version, and the studio agreed as long as Laurents was not part of the package.\n\nIt was not until then that Laurents learned he officially had been blacklisted, primarily because a review of \"Home of the Brave\" had been published in the \"Daily Worker\". He decided to return to Paris, but the State Department refused to renew his passport. Laurents spent three months trying to clear his name, and after submitting a lengthy letter explaining his political beliefs in detail, it was determined they were so idiosyncratic he couldn't have been a member of any subversive groups. Within a week his passport was renewed, and the following day he sailed for Europe on the \"Ile de France\". While on board, he received a cable from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer offering him a screenwriting assignment. The blacklist had ended.\n\nLaurents wrote \"Original Story By Arthur Laurents: A Memoir of Broadway and Hollywood\", published in 2000. In it, he discusses his lengthy career and his many gay affairs and long-term relationships, including those with Farley Granger and Tom Hatcher. Hatcher was an aspiring actor whom Gore Vidal suggested Laurents seek out at the Beverly Hills men's clothing store Hatcher was managing at the time. The couple remained together for 52 years until Hatcher's death on October 26, 2006.\n\nLaurents wrote \"Mainly on Directing: Gypsy, West Side Story and Other Musicals\", published in 2009, in which he discussed musicals he directed and the work of other directors he admired.\n\nHis latest memoir was published posthumously in September 2012, titled \"The Rest of the Story\".\n\nLaurents died at the age of 93 at his home in Manhattan on May 5, 2011 of pneumonia complications, as reported by \"The New York Times\". Following a long tradition, Broadway theatre lights were dimmed at 8 p.m. on May 6, 2011, for one minute in his memory. His ashes were buried alongside those of Tom Hatcher in a memorial bench in Quogue, Long Island, New York.\n\n\n\n\nA new award was established in 2010, The Laurents/Hatcher Foundation Award. This is awarded annually \"for an un-produced, full-length play of social relevance by an emerging American playwright.\" The Laurents/Hatcher Foundation will give $50,000 to the writer with a grant of $100,000 towards production costs at a nonprofit theatre. The first award will be given in 2011.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3003", "title": "Adrian Lamo", "text": "Adrian Lamo\n\nAdrian Lamo (born February 20, 1981) is an American threat analyst and former hacker.\n\nLamo first gained media attention for breaking into several high-profile computer networks, including those of \"The New York Times\", Yahoo!, and Microsoft, culminating in his 2003 arrest. \n\nIn 2010, Lamo indirectly reported U.S. soldier Chelsea Manning to the Army's Criminal Investigation Command, claiming that Manning had leaked hundreds of thousands of sensitive U.S. government documents to WikiLeaks.\n\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, Lamo did not graduate from high school, but received a GED and was court ordered to take courses at American River College, a community college in Sacramento County, California. Known as the \"Homeless Hacker\" for his reportedly transient lifestyle, Lamo has claimed that he has spent much of his travels couch-surfing, squatting in abandoned buildings, and traveling to Internet cafes, libraries, and universities to investigate networks, sometimes exploiting security holes. Despite performing authorized and unauthorized vulnerability assessments for several large, high-profile entities, Lamo claims to have refused to accept payment for his services.\n\nIn the mid-1990s, Lamo volunteered for the gay and lesbian media firm PlanetOut.com. In 1998, Lamo was appointed to the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer and Questioning Youth Task Force by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors. In 1999, Lamo was ordained a minister in the Universal Life Church.\n\nDuring this period, in 2001, he overdosed on prescription amphetamines.\n\nIn a 2004 interview with \"Wired\", an ex-girlfriend of Lamo's described him as \"very controlling,\" alleging, \"He carried a stun gun, which he used on me.\" According to the same article, a court allegedly issued a restraining order against Lamo. Lamo disputed the claim, writing, \"I have never been subject to a restraining order in my life\".\n\nLamo claimed in a \"Wired\" article that in May 2010, after he reported the theft of his backpack, an investigating officer noted unusual behavior and placed him under a 72-hour involuntary psychiatric hold, which was extended to a nine-day hold. Lamo says he was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome at the psych ward.\n\nFor a period of time circa March 2011, Lamo was allegedly \"in hiding,\" claiming that his \"life was under threat\" after turning in Manning. During this time he struggled with substance abuse, but claims he is now in recovery and his security situation has improved as well.\n\nLamo first became known for operating AOL watchdog site \"Inside-AOL.com\".\n\nIn December 2001, Lamo was praised by Worldcom for helping to fortify their corporate security. In February 2002, he broke into the internal computer network of \"The New York Times\", added his name to the internal database of expert sources, and used the paper's LexisNexis account to conduct research on high-profile subjects. The \"New York Times\" filed a complaint, and a warrant for Lamo's arrest was issued in August 2003 following a 15-month investigation by federal prosecutors in New York. At 10:15 AM on September 9, after spending a few days in hiding, he surrendered to the US Marshals in Sacramento, California. He re-surrendered to the FBI in New York City on September 11, and pleaded guilty to one felony count of computer crimes against Microsoft, LexisNexis, and \"The New York Times\" on January 8, 2004.\n\nLater in 2004, Lamo was sentenced to six months' detention at his parents' home, plus two years probation, and was ordered to pay roughly $65,000 in restitution. He was convicted of compromising security at \"The New York Times\", Microsoft, Yahoo!, and WorldCom.\n\nWhen challenged for a response to allegations that he was glamorizing crime for the sake of publicity, his response was: \"Anything I could say about my person or my actions would only cheapen what they have to say for themselves\". When approached for comment during his criminal case, Lamo frustrated reporters with non sequiturs, such as: \"Faith manages\". (likely a reference to science fiction television show \"Babylon 5\"), and \"It's a beautiful day.\"\n\nAt his sentencing, Lamo expressed remorse for harm he had caused by his intrusions. The court record quotes him as adding: \"I want to answer for what I have done and do better with my life.\"\n\nHe subsequently declared on the question and answer site Quora, that: \"We all own our actions in fullness, not just the pleasant aspects of them.\" Lamo accepted that he had committed mistakes.\n\nOn May 9, 2006, while 18 months into a two-year probation sentence, Lamo refused to give the United States government a blood sample, which they had demanded in order to record his DNA in their CODIS system. According to his attorney, Lamo has a religious objection to giving blood but is willing to give his DNA in another form. On June 15, 2007, lawyers for Lamo filed a motion citing the Book of Genesis as one basis for Lamo's religious opposition to the giving of blood.\n\nOn June 21, 2007, it was reported that Lamo's legal counsel had reached a settlement agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice whereby Lamo would submit DNA via buccal swab. According to Kevin Poulsen's blog, \"the Justice Department formally settled the case, filing a joint stipulation along with Lamo's federal public defender dropping the demand for blood.\n\nIn February 2009, a partial list of the anonymous donors to the WikiLeaks not-for-profit website was leaked and published on the WikiLeaks website. Some media sources indicated at the time that Lamo was among the donors on the list. Lamo commented on his Twitter page, \"Thanks WikiLeaks, for leaking your donor list... That's dedication.\"\n\nIn May 2010, Lamo indirectly reported to U.S. Army authorities that Manning had claimed to have leaked a large body of classified documents, including 260,000 classified United States diplomatic cables. Lamo stated that Manning also \"took credit for leaking\" the video footage of the July 12, 2007 Baghdad airstrike, which has since come to be known as the \"Collateral Murder\" video.\n\nLamo has stated that he would not have turned Manning in \"if lives weren't in danger... [Manning] was in a war zone and basically trying to vacuum up as much classified information as [she] could, and just throwing it up into the air.\" WikiLeaks responded by denouncing Lamo and \"Wired Magazine\" reporter Kevin Poulsen as \"notorious felons, informers & manipulators\", and said: \"journalists should take care.\"\n\nAccording to Andy Greenberg of \"Forbes\", Lamo may have worked as a \"security specialist\" with Project Vigilant, a private security institution that works with the FBI and the NSA. Chet Uber, the head of Project Vigilant, has claimed, \"I'm the one who called the U.S. government... All the people who say that Adrian is a narc, he did a patriotic thing. He sees all kinds of hacks, and he was seriously worried about people dying.\"\n\nLamo has been criticized by fellow hackers, such as those at the Hackers on Planet Earth conference in 2010, who called him a \"snitch\". Another commented to Lamo, following his speech during a panel discussion, saying: \"From my perspective, I see what you have done as treason.\"\n\nWikiLeaks founder Julian Assange calls Lamo \"a very disreputable character\", and says that Lamo's monetary support for WikiLeaks amounted to only 20 U.S. dollars on one occasion. Assange says that it is \"not right to call [Lamo] a contributor to WikiLeaks\", and questions the electronic record associated with the Manning–Lamo chats, because, according to Assange, Lamo has \"strange motivations\" and \"had been in a mental hospital three weeks beforehand\".\n\nLamo has characterized his decision to work with the government as morally ambiguous but objectively necessary, writing in \"The Guardian\": \"There were no right choices that day, only less wrong ones. It was cold, it was needful, and it was no one's to make except mine,\" adding to \"The Guardian\"'s Ed Pilkington: \"There were hundreds of thousands of documents—let's drop the number to 250,000 to be conservative—and doing nothing meant gambling that each and every one would do no harm if no warning was given.\"\n\nThe Taliban insurgency later announced its intention to execute Afghan nationals named in the leaks as having cooperated with the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan. By that time, the United States had received months of advance warning that their names were among the leaks. Manning was arrested and incarcerated in the U.S. military justice system and later sentenced to 35 years in confinement, which President Barack Obama commuted to a total of seven years at the end of his term, including time served. Lamo responded to the commutation with a single post on Medium and an interview with U.S. News & World Report.\n\nLamo's role in the Manning case drew criticism from Glenn Greenwald of \"Salon Magazine\". Greenwald suggested that Lamo lied to Manning by turning Manning in, and then lied after the fact to cover up the circumstances of Manning's confessions. Greenwald places the incident in the context of what he calls \"the Obama administration's unprecedented war on whistle-blowers\". Greenwald's critique of \"Wired Magazine\" has drawn a response from that magazine which suggests that Greenwald is writing disingenuously: \"At his most reasonable, Greenwald impugns our motives, attacks the character of our staff and carefully selects his facts and sources to misrepresent the truth and generate outrage in his readership.\" In an article about the Manning case, Greenwald mentions \"Wired\" reporter Kevin Poulsen's 1994 felony conviction for computer hacking, suggesting that \"over the years, Poulsen has served more or less as Lamo's personal media voice.\" Greenwald is skeptical of an earlier story written by Poulsen about Lamo's institutionalization on psychiatric grounds, writing: \"Lamo claimed he was diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome, a somewhat fashionable autism diagnosis which many stars in the computer world have also claimed.\" In an article entitled \"The Worsening Journalistic Disgrace at Wired\", Greenwald claimed that \"Wired\" was \"actively conceal[ing] from the public, for months on end, the key evidence in a political story that has generated headlines around the world.\"\n\nOn July 13, 2011, \"Wired\" published the logs in full, stating: \"The most significant of the unpublished details have now been publicly established with sufficient authority that we no longer believe any purpose is served by withholding the logs.\" Greenwald wrote of the newly released logs that in his opinion they validated his claim that \"Wired\" had concealed important evidence.\n\nLamo has been critical of media coverage of the hacker collective Anonymous, claiming that media outlets have over-hyped and mythologized the group. He also said that Anonymous is not the \"invulnerable\" group it is claimed to be, and he can see \"no rational point in what they're doing.\"\n\nOn August 22, 2002, Lamo was removed from a segment of \"NBC Nightly News\" when, after being asked to demonstrate his skills for the camera, he gained access to NBC's internal network. NBC was concerned that they broke the law by taping Lamo while he (possibly) broke the law. Lamo was a guest on \"The Screen Savers\" five times beginning in 2002.\n\n\"Hackers Wanted\", a documentary film focusing on Lamo's life as a hacker, was produced by Trigger Street Productions, and narrated by Kevin Spacey. Focusing on the 2003 hacking scene, the film features interviews with Kevin Rose and Steve Wozniak. The film has not been conventionally released. In May 2009, a video purporting to be a trailer for \"Hackers Wanted\" was allegedly leaked to or by the Internet film site Eye Crave. In May 2010, an earlier cut of the film was leaked via BitTorrent. According to an insider, what was leaked on the Internet was a very different film from the newer version, which includes additional footage. On June 12, 2010, a director's cut version of the film was also leaked onto torrent sites.\n\nLamo has also appeared on Good Morning America, Fox News, Democracy Now!, Frontline (U.S. TV series), and repeatedly on KCRA-TV News as an expert on netcentric crime and incidents. He was interviewed for the documentaries and .\n\nLamo reconnected with Leo Laporte in 2015 as a result of a Quora article on the \"dark web\" for an episode of The New Screen Savers, bringing things full circle.\n\nLamo wrote his first book, \"Ask Adrian\" which is a collection of his Q&A's from Quora. The book is only available as an ebook from Buk.io.\n\nhttps://www.quora.com/What-is-the-deep-dark-web-and-how-do-you-access-it/answer/Adri%C3%A1n-Lamo\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3004", "title": "Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States", "text": "Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States\n\nAssociate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States are the members of the Supreme Court of the United States other than the Chief Justice of the United States. The number of Associate Justices is determined by the United States Congress and is currently set at eight by the Judiciary Act of 1869.\n\nLike the Chief Justice, Associate Justices are nominated by the President of the United States and are confirmed by the United States Senate by majority vote. This is provided for in Article II of the Constitution, which states that the President \"shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint... Judges of the supreme Court.\" Although the Constitution refers to them as \"Judges of the Supreme Court\", the title actually used is \"Associate Justice\", introduced in the Judiciary Act of 1789. Associate justices were traditionally styled \"Mr. Justice\" in court opinions, but the title was shortened to \"Justice\" in 1980, a year before the first female justice was appointed.\n\nArticle III of the Constitution specifies that Associate Justices, and all other United States federal judges \"shall hold their Offices during good Behavior\". This language means that the appointments are effectively for life, and that, once confirmed, one's tenure of office ends only when a justice dies, retires, or is removed from office following impeachment by the House of Representatives and conviction by the Senate.\n\nEach of the Justices of the Supreme Court has a single vote in deciding the cases argued before it; the Chief Justice's vote counts no more than that of any other Justice. However, in drafting opinions, the Chief Justice enjoys additional influence in case disposition if in the majority through his power to assign who writes the opinion. Otherwise, the senior justice in the majority assigns the writing of a decision. Furthermore, the Chief Justice leads the discussion of the case among the justices. The Chief Justice has certain administrative responsibilities that the other Justices do not and is paid slightly more ($255,500 per year for the Chief Justice and $244,400 per year for each Associate Justice).\n\nAssociate Justices have seniority by order of appointment, although the Chief Justice is always considered to be the most senior. If two justices are appointed on the same day, the older is designated the senior Justice of the two. Currently, the senior Associate Justice is Anthony Kennedy. By tradition, when the Justices are in conference deliberating the outcome of cases before the Court, the justices state their views in order of seniority. Also, under , \"when the Chief Justice is unable to discharge his functions, or that office is vacant, his duties are carried out by the most senior Associate Justice until the disability or the vacancy ends.\"\n\nCurrently, there are eight associate justices on the Court. The justices, ordered by seniority, are:\n\nAn associate justice who leaves the Court after attaining the age and meeting the service requirements prescribed by federal statute () may retire in senior status rather than resign. After retirement, they keep their title, and by custom may also keep a set of chambers in the Supreme Court building, and employ law clerks. The names of retired associate justices continue to appear alongside those of the active justices in the bound volumes of Supreme Court decisions. Federal statute () provides that retired Supreme Court justices may serve—if designated and assigned by the Chief Justice—on panels of the U.S. courts of appeals, or on the U.S. district courts. Retired justices are not, however, authorized to take part in the consideration or decision of any cases before the Supreme Court (unlike other retired federal judges who may be permitted do so in their former courts); neither are they known or designated as a \"senior judge\". When, after his retirement, William O. Douglas attempted to take a more active role than was customary, maintaining that it was his prerogative to do so because of his senior status, he was rebuffed by Chief Justice Warren Burger and admonished by the whole Court.\n\nCurrently, there are three living retired Associate Justices: Sandra Day O'Connor, retired January 31, 2006; David H. Souter, retired June 29, 2009; and John Paul Stevens, retired June 29, 2010. Both O'Connor and Souter occasionally serve on panels of the Courts of Appeals of various circuits. Stevens has not performed any judicial duties.\n\nSince the Supreme Court was established in 1789, the following 101 persons have served as Associate Justice:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3010", "title": "Alan Jay Lerner", "text": "Alan Jay Lerner\n\nAlan Jay Lerner (August 31, 1918 – June 14, 1986) was an American lyricist and librettist. In collaboration with Frederick Loewe, and later Burton Lane, he created some of the world's most popular and enduring works of musical theatre for both the stage and on film. He won three Tony Awards and three Academy Awards, among other honors.\n\nBorn in New York City, he was the son of Edith Adelson Lerner and Joseph Jay Lerner, whose brother, Samuel Alexander Lerner, was founder and owner of the Lerner Stores, a chain of dress shops. One of Lerner's cousins was the radio comedian/television game show panelist Henry Morgan. Lerner was educated at Bedales School in England, The Choate School (now Choate Rosemary Hall) in Wallingford, Connecticut, (where he wrote \"The Choate Marching Song\") and Harvard. He attended both Camp Androscoggin and Camp Greylock. At both Choate and Harvard, Lerner was a classmate of John F. Kennedy; at Choate they had worked together on the yearbook staff. Like Cole Porter at Yale and Richard Rodgers at Columbia, his career in musical theater began with his collegiate contributions, in Lerner's case to the annual Harvard Hasty Pudding musicals. During the summers of 1936 and 1937, Lerner studied music composition at Juilliard. While attending Harvard, he lost his sight in his left eye due to an accident in the boxing ring. In 1957, Lerner and Leonard Bernstein, another of Lerner's college classmates, collaborated on \"Lonely Men of Harvard,\" a tongue-in-cheek salute to their alma mater.\n\nDue to his injury, Lerner could not serve in World War II. Instead he wrote radio scripts, including \"Your Hit Parade\", until he was introduced to Austrian composer Frederick Loewe, who needed a partner, in 1942 at the Lamb's Club. While at the Lamb's, he also met Lorenz Hart, with whom he would also collaborate.\n\nLerner and Loewe's first collaboration was a musical adaptation of Barry Conners's farce \"The Patsy\" called \"Life of the Party\" for a Detroit stock company. The lyrics were mostly written by Earle Crooker, but he had left the project, with the score needing vast improvement. It enjoyed a nine-week run and encouraged the duo to join forces with Arthur Pierson for \"What's Up?\", which opened on Broadway in 1943. It ran for 63 performances and was followed two years later by \"The Day Before Spring\".\n\nTheir first hit was \"Brigadoon\" (1947), a romantic fantasy set in a mystical Scottish village, directed by Robert Lewis. It was followed in 1951 by the Gold Rush story \"Paint Your Wagon\". While the show ran for nearly a year and included songs that later became pop standards, it was less successful that Lerner's previous work. He later said of \"Paint Your Wagon\", it was \"a success but not a hit.\"\n\nLerner worked with Kurt Weill on the stage musical \"Love Life\" (1948) and Burton Lane on the movie musical \"Royal Wedding\" (1951). In that same year Lerner also wrote the Oscar-winning original screenplay for \"An American in Paris\", produced by Arthur Freed and directed by Vincente Minnelli. This was the same team who would later join with Lerner and Loewe to create \"Gigi\".\n\nIn 1956, Lerner and Loewe unveiled \"My Fair Lady\". Before finishing the musical, Lerner was eager to write while \"My Fair Lady\" was taking so long to complete. Burton Lane and Lerner were working on a musical about Li'l Abner. Gabriel Pascal owned the rights to \"Pygmalion\", which had been unsuccessful with other composers who tried to adapt it into a musical. Arthur Schwartz and Howard Dietz first tried, and then Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II attempted, but gave up and Hammerstein told Lerner, \"\"Pygmalion\" had no subplot\". Lerner and Loewe's adaptation of George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\" retained his social commentary and added appropriate songs for the characters of Henry Higgins and Eliza Doolittle, played originally by Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews. It set box-office records in New York and London. When brought to the screen in 1964, the movie version would win eight Oscars, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Rex Harrison.\n\nLerner and Loewe's run of success continued with their next project, a film adaptation of stories from Colette, the Academy Award-winning film musical \"Gigi\", starring Leslie Caron, Louis Jourdan and Maurice Chevalier. The film won all of its nine Oscar nominations, a record at that point in time, and a special Oscar for co-star Maurice Chevalier.\n\nThe Lerner-Loewe partnership cracked under the stress of producing the Arthurian \"Camelot\" in 1960, with Loewe resisting Lerner's desire to direct as well as write when original director Moss Hart suffered a heart attack in the last few months of rehearsals, and would die shortly after the show's premiere. Lerner was hospitalized with bleeding ulcers while Loewe continued to have heart troubles. \"Camelot\" was a hit nonetheless, with a poignant coda; immediately following the assassination of John F. Kennedy, his widow told reporter Theodore H. White that JFK's administration reminded her of the \"one brief shining moment\" of Lerner and Loewe's \"Camelot\". To this day, \"Camelot\" is invoked to describe the idealism, romance, and tragedy of the Kennedy years.\n\nLoewe retired to Palm Springs, California while Lerner went through a series of musicals, some successful, some not, with such composers as André Previn (\"Coco\"), John Barry (\"Lolita, My Love\"), Leonard Bernstein (\"1600 Pennsylvania Avenue\"), Burton Lane (\"Carmelina\") and Charles Strouse (\"Dance a Little Closer\", based on the film, \"Idiot's Delight\", nicknamed \"Close A Little Faster\" by Broadway wags because it closed on opening night). Most biographers blame Lerner's professional decline on the lack of a strong director with whom Lerner could collaborate, as Neil Simon did with Mike Nichols or Stephen Sondheim with Harold Prince (Moss Hart, who had directed \"My Fair Lady,\" died shortly after \"Camelot\" opened). In 1965 Lerner collaborated again with Burton Lane on the musical \"On a Clear Day You Can See Forever\", which was adapted for film in 1970. At this time, Lerner was hired by film producer Arthur P. Jacobs to write a treatment for an upcoming film project, \"Doctor Dolittle\", but Lerner abrogated his contract after several non-productive months of non-communicative procrastination and was replaced with Leslie Bricusse. Lerner was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1971.\n\nIn 1973, Lerner coaxed Fritz Loewe out of retirement to augment the \"Gigi\" score for a musical stage adaptation. The following year they collaborated on a musical film version of \"The Little Prince\", based on the classic children's tale by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. This film was a critical and box office failure, but has gained a modern following.\n\nLerner's autobiography \"The Street Where I Live\" (1978), was an account of three of his and Loewe's successful collaborations, \"My Fair Lady\", \"Gigi\", and \"Camelot\" along with personal information. In the last year of his life he published \"The Musical Theatre: A Celebration\", a well-reviewed history of the theatre replete with personal anecdotes and his trademark wit. A book of Lerner's lyrics entitled \"A Hymn To Him\", edited by British writer Benny Green, was published in 1987.\n\nAt the time of Lerner's death, he had just begun to write lyrics for \"The Phantom of the Opera\", and was replaced by Charles Hart. He also had been working with Gerard Kenny and Kristi Kane in London on a musical version of the classic film \"My Man Godfrey\". He received an urgent call from Andrew Lloyd Webber who wanted him to write the lyrics to \"The Phantom of the Opera\", for which he wrote \"Masquerade\". He then informed Webber that he wanted to leave the project, as he was losing his memory (due to an undiagnosed brain tumor). He had turned down an invitation to write the English-language lyrics for the musical version of \"Les Misérables\".\n\nAfter Lerner's death, Paul Blake made a musical revue based on Lerner's lyrics and life. \"Almost Like Being in Love\" featured music by Frederick Loewe, Burton Lane, André Previn, Charles Strouse, and Kurt Weill. The show ran for only 10 days at the Herbst Theatre in San Francisco.\n\nLerner would often struggle with writing his lyrics. He was surprisingly able to complete \"I Could Have Danced All Night\" from \"My Fair Lady\" in one 24-hour period. He usually spent months on one song and was constantly rewriting them. Lerner was said to have insecurity about his talent. He would sometimes write songs with someone in mind, for instance, \"I've Grown Accustomed To Her Face\" from \"My Fair Lady\" was written with Rex Harrison in mind to complement his very limited vocal range.\n\nLerner said of writing:\n\"You have to keep in mind that there is no such thing as realism or naturalism in the theater. That is a myth. If there was realism in the theater, there would never be a third act. Nothing ends that way. A man's life is made up of thousands and thousands of little pieces. In writing fiction, you select 20 or 30 of them. In a musical, you select even fewer than that. \"First, we decide where a song is needed in a play. Second, what is it going to be about? Third, we discuss the mood of the song. Fourth, I give (Loewe) a title. Then he writes the music to the title and the general feeling of the song is established. After he's written the melody, then I write the lyrics.\" \n\nIn a 1979 interview on NPR's \"All Things Considered\", Lerner went into some depth about his lyrics for \"My Fair Lady\". Professor Henry Higgins sings, \"Look at her, a prisoner of the gutters / Condemned by every syllable she utters / By right she should be taken out and hung / For the cold-blooded murder of the English tongue.\" Lerner said he knew the lyric used incorrect grammar for the sake of a rhyme. He was later approached about it by another famous lyricist:\n\"I thought, oh well, maybe nobody will notice it, but not at all. Two nights after it opened, I ran into Noël Coward in a restaurant, and he walked over and he said, \"Dear boy, it is \"hanged\", not \"hung\".\" I said, \"Oh, Noel, I know it, I know it! You know, shut up!\" So, and there's another, \"Than to ever let a woman in my life.\" It should be, \"as to ever let a woman in my life,\" but it just didn't sing well.\"\nLerner's personal foibles were the stuff of tabloid legend. For nearly twenty years he battled an amphetamine addiction; during the 1960s he was a patient of Max Jacobson, known as \"Dr. Feelgood\", who administered injections of \"vitamins with enzymes\" that were in fact laced with amphetamines. Lerner's addiction is believed to have been the result of Jacobson's practice.\n\nHe married eight times: Ruth Boyd (1940–1947), singer Marion Bell (1947–1949), actress Nancy Olson (1950–1957), lawyer Micheline Muselli Pozzo di Borgo (1957–1965), editor Karen Gundersen (1966–1974), actress Sandra Payne (1974–1976), Nina Bushkin (1977–1981) and Liz Robertson (1981–1986 [his death]). Four of his eight wives – Olson, Payne, Bushkin, and Robertson – were actresses.\nHis seventh wife, Nina Bushkin, whom he married on May 30, 1977, was the director of development at Mannes College of Music and the daughter of composer and musician Joey Bushkin. After their divorce in 1981, Lerner was ordered to pay her a settlement of $50,000. Lerner wrote in his autobiography (as quoted by \"The New York Times\"): \"All I can say is that if I had no flair for marriage, I also had no flair for bachelorhood.\" One of his ex-wives reportedly said, \"Marriage is Alan's way of saying goodbye.\"\n\nLerner had four children: three daughters, Susan (by Boyd), Liza and Jennifer (by Olson); and one son, screenwriter and journalist Michael Alan Lerner (by di Borgo).\n\nLerner's multiple divorces cost him much of his wealth, but Lerner bears primary responsibility for his financial ups and downs, and was apparently less than truthful about his financial fecklessness. One persistent fiction, widely publicized, was that his divorce settlement from Micheline Muselli Pozzo di Borgo (his fourth wife) cost him an estimated $1 million in 1965. This was a gross distortion of the truth. Lerner's pattern of financial mismanagement continued until his death from cancer in 1986, when he reportedly owed the US Internal Revenue Service over US$1,000,000 in back taxes, and was unable to pay for his final medical expenses.\n\nOn June 14, 1986, Lerner died of lung cancer in Manhattan at the age of 67. At the time of his death he was married to actress Liz Robertson, who was 36 years his junior. He lived in Center Island, New York. He has a memorial plaque in St Paul's Church, the Actor's Church in Covent Garden in London.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3012", "title": "Al Capp", "text": "Al Capp\n\nAlfred Gerald Caplin (September 28, 1909 – November 5, 1979), better known as Al Capp, was an American cartoonist and humorist best known for the satirical comic strip \"Li'l Abner\", which he created in 1934 and continued writing and (with help from assistants) drawing until 1977. He also wrote the comic strips \"Abbie an' Slats\" (in the years 1937–45) and \"Long Sam\" (1954). He won the National Cartoonists Society's Reuben Award in 1947 for Cartoonist of the Year, and their 1979 Elzie Segar Award, posthumously for his \"unique and outstanding contribution to the profession of cartooning.\" Comic strips dealt with northern urban experiences until the year Capp introduced \"Li'l Abner,\" the first strip based in the South. Although Capp was from Connecticut, he spent 43 years teaching the world about Dogpatch, reaching an estimated 60 million readers in over 900 American newspapers and 100 foreign papers in 28 countries. M. Thomas Inge says Capp made a large personal fortune on the strip and \"had a profound influence on the way the world viewed the American South.\"\n\nBorn in New Haven, Connecticut, of East European Jewish heritage, Capp was the eldest child of Otto Philip and Matilda (Davidson) Caplin. Capp's parents were both natives of Latvia whose families had migrated to New Haven in the 1880s. \"My mother and father had been brought to this country from Russia when they were infants,\" wrote Capp in 1978. \"Their fathers had found that the great promise of America was true — it was no crime to be a Jew.\" The Caplins were dirt poor, and Capp later recalled stories of his mother going out in the night to sift through ash barrels for reusable bits of coal.\n\nIn August 1919, at the age of nine, Capp was run down by a trolley car and had to have his left leg amputated, well above the knee. According to his father Otto's unpublished autobiography, young Capp was not prepared for the amputation beforehand; having been in a coma for days, he suddenly awoke to discover that his leg was removed. He was eventually given a prosthetic leg, but only learned to use it by adopting a slow way of walking which became increasingly painful as he grew older. The childhood tragedy of losing a leg likely helped shape Capp’s cynical worldview, which, funny as it was, was certainly darker and more sardonic than that of the average newspaper cartoonist. \"I was indignant as hell about that leg,\" he would reveal in a November 1950 interview in \"Time\" magazine.\n\n\"The secret of how to live without resentment or embarrassment in a world in which I was different from everyone else,\" Capp philosophically wrote (in \"Life magazine\" on May 23, 1960), \"was to be indifferent to that difference.\" It was the prevailing opinion among his friends that Capp's Swiftian satire was, to some degree, a creatively channeled, compensatory response to his disability.\n\nCapp's father, a failed businessman and an amateur cartoonist, introduced him to drawing as a form of therapy. He became quite proficient, learning mostly on his own. Among his earliest influences were \"Punch\" cartoonist–illustrator Phil May, and American comic strip cartoonists Tad Dorgan, Cliff Sterrett, Rube Goldberg, Rudolph Dirks, Fred Opper, Billy DeBeck, George McManus and Milt Gross. At about this same time, Capp became a voracious reader. According to Capp's brother Elliot, Alfred had finished all of Shakespeare and George Bernard Shaw by the time he turned 13. Among his childhood favorites were Dickens, Smollett, Mark Twain, Booth Tarkington, and later, Robert Benchley and S. J. Perelman.\n\nCapp spent five years at Bridgeport High School in Bridgeport, Connecticut, without receiving a diploma. The cartoonist liked to joke about how he failed geometry for nine straight terms. His formal training came from a series of art schools in the New England area. Attending three of them in rapid succession, the impoverished Capp was thrown out of each for nonpayment of tuition—the Boston Museum School of Fine Arts, the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, and Designers Art School in Boston—the latter before launching his career. Capp had already decided to become a cartoonist. \"I heard that Bud Fisher (creator of \"Mutt and Jeff\") got $3,000 a week and was constantly marrying French countesses,\" Capp said. \"I decided that was for me.\"\n\nIn early 1932, Capp hitchhiked to New York City. He lived in \"airless rat holes\" in Greenwich Village and turned out advertising strips at $2 apiece while scouring the city hunting for jobs. He eventually found work at the Associated Press when he was 23 years old. By March 1932, Capp was drawing \"Colonel Gilfeather\", a single-panel, AP-owned property created in 1930 by Dick Dorgan. Capp changed the focus and title to \"Mister Gilfeather\", but soon grew to hate the feature. He left the Associated Press in September 1932. Before leaving, he met Milton Caniff, and the two became lifelong friends. Capp moved to Boston and married Catherine Wingate Cameron, whom he had met earlier in art class. She died in 2006 at the age of 96.\n\nLeaving his new wife with her parents in Amesbury, Massachusetts, he subsequently returned to New York in 1933, in the midst of the Great Depression. \"I was 23, I carried a mass of drawings, and I had nearly five dollars in my pocket. People were sleeping in alleys then, willing to work at anything.\" There he met Ham Fisher, who hired him to ghost on \"Joe Palooka\". During one of Fisher's extended vacations, Capp's \"Joe Palooka\" story arc introduced a stupid, coarse, oafish mountaineer named \"Big Leviticus,\" a crude prototype. (Leviticus was actually much closer to Capp's later villains Lem and Luke Scragg, than to the much more appealing and innocent Li'l Abner.)\n\nAlso during this period, Capp was working at night on samples for the strip that would eventually become \"Li'l Abner\". He based his cast of characters on the authentic mountain-dwellers he met while hitchhiking through rural West Virginia and the Cumberland Valley as a teenager. (This was years before the Tennessee Valley Authority Act brought basic utilities like electricity and running water to the region.) Leaving \"Joe Palooka\", Capp sold \"Li'l Abner\" to United Feature Syndicate (now known as United Media). The feature was launched on Monday, August 13, 1934, in eight North American newspapers—including the \"New York Mirror\"—and was an immediate success. Alfred G. Caplin eventually became \"Al Capp\" because the syndicate felt the original would not fit in a cartoon frame. Capp had it changed legally in 1949.\n\nHis younger brother Elliot Caplin also became a comic strip writer, best known for co-creating the soap opera strip \"The Heart of Juliet Jones\" with artist Stan Drake and conceiving the comic strip character \"Broom-Hilda\" with cartoonist Russell Myers. Elliot also authored several off-Broadway plays, including \"A Nickel for Picasso\" (1981), which was based on and dedicated to his mother and his famous brother.\n\nWhat began as a hillbilly burlesque soon evolved into one of the most imaginative, popular and well-drawn strips of the 20th century. Featuring vividly outlandish characters, bizarre situations, and equal parts suspense, slapstick, irony, satire, black humor and biting social commentary, \"Li'l Abner\" is considered a classic of the genre. The comic strip stars Li'l Abner Yokum—the simple-minded, loutish but good-natured and eternally innocent hayseed who lives with his parents—scrawny but superhuman Mammy Yokum, and shiftless, childlike Pappy Yokum.\n\n\"Yokum\" was a combination of \"yokel\" and \"hokum\", although Capp established a deeper meaning for the name during a series of visits around 1965–1970 with comics historians George E. Turner and Michael H. Price. “It’s phonetic Hebrew—that’s what it is, all right—and that’s what I was getting at with the name Yokum, more so than any attempt to sound \"hickish,\"\" said Capp. \"That was a fortunate coincidence, of course, that the name should pack a backwoods connotation. But it’s a godly conceit, really, playing off a godly name—\"Joachim\" means 'God’s determination', something like that—that also happens to have a rustic ring to it.\"\n\nThe Yokums live in the backwater hamlet of Dogpatch, Kentucky. Described by its creator as \"an average stone-age community,\" Dogpatch mostly consists of hopelessly ramshackle log cabins, pine trees, \"tarnip\" fields and \"hawg\" wallows. Whatever energy Abner had went into evading the marital goals of Daisy Mae Scragg, his sexy, well-endowed (but virtuous) girlfriend—until Capp finally gave in to reader pressure and allowed the couple to marry. This newsworthy event made the cover of \"Life\" on March 31, 1952.\n\nCapp peopled his comic strip with an assortment of memorable characters, including Marryin' Sam, Hairless Joe, Lonesome Polecat, Evil-Eye Fleegle, General Bullmoose, Lena the Hyena, Senator Jack S. Phogbound (Capp's caricature of the anti-New Deal Dixiecrats), the \"(shudder!)\" Scraggs, Available Jones, Nightmare Alice, Earthquake McGoon, and a host of others. Most notably, certainly from a G.I. point of view, are the beautiful, full-figured women like Daisy Mae, Wolf Gal, Stupefyin' Jones and Moonbeam McSwine (a caricature of his wife Catherine, aside from the dirt)—all of whom found their way onto the painted noses of bomber planes during World War II and the Korean War. Perhaps Capp's most popular creations were the Shmoos, creatures whose incredible usefulness and generous nature made them a threat to civilization as we know it. Another famous character was Joe Btfsplk, who wants to be a loving friend but is \"the world's worst jinx,\" bringing bad luck to all those nearby. Btfsplk (his name is \"pronounced\" by simply blowing a \"raspberry\" or Bronx cheer) always has an iconic dark cloud over his head.\n\nDogpatch residents regularly combat the likes of city slickers, business tycoons, government officials and intellectuals with their homespun simplicity. Situations often take the characters to other destinations, including New York City, Washington, D.C., Hollywood, tropical islands, the Moon, Mars, and some purely fanciful worlds of Capp's invention. The latter includes El Passionato, Kigmyland, The Republic of Crumbumbo, Skunk Hollow, The Valley of the Shmoon, Planets Pincus Number 2 and 7, and a miserable frozen wasteland known as Lower Slobbovia, a pointedly political satire of backward nations and foreign diplomacy that remains a contemporary reference. \"Indeed, \"Li'l Abner\" incorporates such a panoply of characters and ideas that it defies summary,\" according to cultural historian Anthony Harkins. \"Yet though Capp's storylines often wandered far afield, his hillbilly setting remained a central touchstone, serving both as a microcosm and a distorting carnival mirror of broader American society.\"\n\nThe strip's popularity grew from an original eight papers, to ultimately more than 900. At its peak, \"Li'l Abner\" was estimated to have been read daily by 60 to 70 million Americans (the U.S. population at the time was only 180 million), with adult readers far outnumbering children. Many communities, high schools and colleges staged Sadie Hawkins dances, patterned after the similar annual event in the strip.\n\nLi'l Abner has one odd design quirk that has puzzled readers for decades: the part in his hair always faces the viewer, no matter which direction Abner is facing. In response to the question “Which side does Abner part his hair on?,\" Capp would answer, “Both.” Capp said he finally found the right \"look\" for Li'l Abner with Henry Fonda's character Dave Tolliver, in \"The Trail of the Lonesome Pine\" (1936). In later years, Capp always claimed to have effectively created the miniskirt, when he first put one on Daisy Mae in 1934.\n\n\"Li'l Abner\" also features a comic strip-within-the-strip: \"Fearless Fosdick\" is a parody of Chester Gould's \"Dick Tracy\". It first appeared in 1942, and proved so popular that it ran intermittently over the next 35 years. Gould was personally parodied in the series as cartoonist \"Lester Gooch\"—the diminutive, much-harassed and occasionally deranged \"creator\" of Fosdick. The style of the \"Fosdick\" sequences closely mimicks \"Tracy\", including the urban setting, the outrageous villains, the galloping mortality rate, the crosshatched shadows, and even the lettering style. In 1952, Fosdick was the star of his own short-lived puppet show on NBC, featuring the Mary Chase marionettes.\n\nBesides \"Dick Tracy\", Capp parodied many other comic strips in \"Li'l Abner\"—including \"Steve Canyon\", \"Superman\" (at least twice; first as \"Jack Jawbreaker\" in 1947, and again in 1966 as \"Chickensouperman\"), \"Mary Worth\" as \"Mary Worm\", \"Peanuts\" {with \"Peewee\" a parody of Charlie Brown with \"Croopy\" parody of Snoopy\" {1968} drawn by Bedley Damp a parody of Charles Schulz}, \"Rex Morgan, M.D.\", \"Little Annie Rooney\" and \"Little Orphan Annie\" (in which Punjab became \"Punjbag,\" an oleaginous slob). \"Fearless Fosdick\"—and Capp's other spoofs like \"Little Fanny Gooney\" (1952) and \"Jack Jawbreaker\"—were almost certainly an early inspiration for Harvey Kurtzman's \"Mad Magazine\", which began in 1952 as a comic book that specifically parodied other comics in the same distinctive style and subversive manner.\n\nCapp also lampooned popular recording idols of the day, such as Elvis Presley (\"Hawg McCall,\" 1957), Liberace (\"Loverboynik,\" 1956), the Beatles (\"the Beasties,\" 1964)—and in 1944, Frank Sinatra. \"Sinatra was the first great public figure I ever wrote about,\" Capp once said. \"I called him 'Hal Fascinatra.' I remember my news syndicate was so worried about what his reaction might be, and we were all surprised when he telephoned and told me how thrilled he was with it. He always made it a point to send me champagne whenever he happened to see me in a restaurant...\" (from \"Frank Sinatra, My Father\" by Nancy Sinatra, 1985). On the other hand, Liberace was \"cut to the quick\" over Loverboynik, according to Capp, and even threatened legal action—as would Joan Baez later, over \"Joanie Phoanie\" in 1967.\n\nCapp was just as likely to parody himself; his self-caricature made frequent, tongue-in-cheek appearances in \"Li'l Abner\". The gag was often at his own expense, as in the above 1951 sequence showing Capp's interaction with \"fans\" (see excerpt), or in his 1955 Disneyland parody, \"Hal Yappland.\" Just about anything could be a target for Capp's satire—in one storyline Li'l Abner is revealed to be the missing link between ape and man. In another, the search is on in Dogpatch for a pair of missing socks knitted by the first President of the United States.\nIn addition to creating \"Li'l Abner\", Capp also co-created two other newspaper strips: \"Abbie an' Slats\" with magazine illustrator Raeburn van Buren in 1937, and \"Long Sam\" with cartoonist Bob Lubbers in 1954, as well as the Sunday \"topper\" strips \"Washable Jones,\" \"Small Fry\" (a.k.a. \"Small Change\"), and \"Advice fo' Chillun.\"\n\nAccording to comics historian Coulton Waugh, a 1947 poll of newspaper readers who claimed they ignored the comics page altogether revealed that many confessed to making a single exception: \"Li'l Abner\". \"When \"Li'l Abner\" made its debut in 1934, the vast majority of comic strips were designed chiefly to amuse or thrill their readers. Capp turned that world upside-down by routinely injecting politics and social commentary into \"Li'l Abner\". The strip was the first to regularly introduce characters and story lines having nothing to do with the nominal stars of the strip. The technique—as invigorating as it was unorthodox—was later adopted by cartoonists like Walt Kelly [\"Pogo\"] and Garry Trudeau [\"Doonesbury\"],\" wrote comic strip historian Rick Marschall. According to Marschall, \"Li'l Abner\" gradually evolved into a broad satire of human nature. In his book \"America's Great Comic Strip Artists\" (1989), Marschall's analysis revealed a decidedly misanthropic subtext.\n\nOver the years, \"Li'l Abner\" has been adapted to radio, animated cartoons, stage production, motion pictures and television. Capp has been compared, at various times, to Mark Twain, Dostoevski, Jonathan Swift, Lawrence Sterne and Rabelais. Fans of the strip ranged from novelist John Steinbeck, who called Capp \"possibly the best writer in the world today\" in 1953, and even earnestly recommended him for the Nobel Prize in literature—to media critic and theorist Marshall McLuhan, who considered Capp \"the only robust satirical force in American life.\" John Updike, comparing Abner to a “hillbilly Candide,” added that the strip’s “richness of social and philosophical commentary approached the Voltairean.” Charlie Chaplin, William F. Buckley, Al Hirschfeld, Harpo Marx, Russ Meyer, John Kenneth Galbraith, Ralph Bakshi, Shel Silverstein, Hugh Downs, Gene Shalit, Frank Cho, Daniel Clowes and (reportedly) even Queen Elizabeth have confessed to being fans of \"Li'l Abner\".\n\n\"Li'l Abner\" was also the subject of the first book-length, scholarly assessment of an American comic strip ever published. \"Li'l Abner: A Study in American Satire\" by Arthur Asa Berger (Twayne, 1969) contained serious analyses of Capp's narrative technique, his use of dialogue, self-caricature and grotesquerie, the place of \"Li'l Abner\" in American satire, and the significance of social criticism and the graphic image. \"One of the few strips ever taken seriously by students of American culture,\" wrote Professor Berger, \"\"Li'l Abner\" is worth studying... because of Capp's imagination and artistry, and because of the strip's very obvious social relevance.\" It was reprinted by the University Press of Mississippi in 1994.\n\nDuring World War II and for many years afterward, Capp worked tirelessly going to hospitals to entertain patients, especially to cheer recent amputees and explain to them that the loss of a limb did not mean an end to a happy and productive life. Making no secret of his own disability, Capp openly joked about his prosthetic leg his whole life. In 1946 Capp created a special full-color comic book, \"Al Capp by Li'l Abner\", to be distributed by the Red Cross to encourage the thousands of amputee veterans returning from the war. Capp was also involved with the Sister Kenny Foundation, which pioneered new treatments for polio in the 1940s. Serving in his capacity as honorary chairman, Capp made public appearances on its behalf for years, contributed free artwork for its annual fund-raising appeals, and entertained crippled and paraplegic children in children's hospitals with inspirational pep talks, humorous stories and sketches.\n\nIn 1940, an RKO movie adaptation starred Granville Owen (later known as Jeff York) as Li'l Abner, with Buster Keaton taking the role of Lonesome Polecat, and featuring a title song with lyrics by Milton Berle. A successful musical comedy adaptation of the strip opened on Broadway at the St. James Theater on November 15, 1956 and had a long run of 693 performances, followed by a nationwide tour. The stage musical, with music and lyrics by Gene de Paul and Johnny Mercer, was adapted into a Technicolor motion picture at Paramount in 1959 by producer Norman Panama and director Melvin Frank, with a score by Nelson Riddle. Several performers repeated their Broadway roles in the film, most memorably Julie Newmar as Stupefyin' Jones and Stubby Kaye as Marryin' Sam.\n\nOther highlights of that decade included the 1942 debut of Fearless Fosdick as Abner's \"ideel\" (hero); the 1946 Lena the Hyena Contest, in which a hideous Lower Slobbovian gal was ultimately revealed in the harrowing winning entry (as judged by Frank Sinatra, Boris Karloff and Salvador Dalí) drawn by noted cartoonist Basil Wolverton; and an ill-fated Sunday parody of \"Gone With the Wind\" that aroused anger and legal threats from author Margaret Mitchell, and led to a printed apology within the strip. In October 1947, Li'l Abner met Rockwell P. Squeezeblood, head of the abusive and corrupt Squeezeblood Comic Strip Syndicate. The resulting sequence, \"Jack Jawbreaker Fights Crime!,\" was a devastating satire of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster's notorious exploitation by DC Comics over \"Superman\". It was later reprinted in \"The World of Li'l Abner\" (1953). (Siegel and Shuster had earlier poked fun at Capp in a \"Superman\" story in \"Action Comics #55\", December 1942, in which a cartoonist named \"Al Hatt\" invents a comic strip featuring the hillbilly \"Tiny Rufe.\")\n\nIn 1947, Capp earned a \"Newsweek\" cover story. That same year the \"New Yorker's\" profile on him was so long that it ran in consecutive issues. In 1948, Capp reached a creative peak with the introduction of the Shmoos, lovable and innocent fantasy creatures who reproduced at amazing speed and brought so many benefits that, ironically, the world economy was endangered. The much-copied storyline was a parable that was metaphorically interpreted in many different ways at the outset of the Cold War.\n\nFollowing his close friend Milton Caniff's lead (with \"Steve Canyon\"), Capp had recently fought a successful battle with the syndicate to gain complete ownership of his feature when the Shmoos debuted. As a result, he reaped enormous financial rewards from the unexpected (and almost unprecedented) merchandising phenomenon that followed. As in the strip, Shmoos suddenly appeared to be everywhere in 1949 and 1950—including a \"Time\" cover story. A paperback collection of the original sequence, \"The Life and Times of the Shmoo\", became a bestseller for Simon & Schuster. Shmoo dolls, clocks, watches, jewelry, earmuffs, wallpaper, fishing lures, air fresheners, soap, ice cream, balloons, ashtrays, comic books, records, sheet music, toys, games, Halloween masks, salt and pepper shakers, decals, pinbacks, tumblers, coin banks, greeting cards, planters, neckties, suspenders, belts, curtains, fountain pens, and other shmoo paraphernalia were produced. A garment factory in Baltimore turned out a whole line of shmoo apparel, including \"Shmooveralls.\" The original sequence and its 1959 sequel, \"The Return of the Shmoo\", have been collected in print many times since, most recently in 2011, always to high sales figures. The Shmoos would later have their own animated TV series.\n\nCapp followed this success with other allegorical fantasy critters, including the aboriginal and masochistic \"Kigmies\", who craved abuse (a story that began as a veiled comment on racial and religious oppression), the dreaded \"Nogoodniks\" (or \"bad\" shmoos), and the irresistible \"Bald Iggle\", a guileless creature whose sad-eyed countenance compelled involuntary truthfulness—with predictably disastrous results.\n\n\"Li'l Abner\" was censored for the first, but not the last time in September 1947, and was pulled from papers by Scripps-Howard. The controversy, as reported in \"Time\", centered on Capp's portrayal of the United States Senate. Said Edward Leech of Scripps, \"We don't think it is good editing or sound citizenship to picture the Senate as an assemblage of freaks and crooks ... boobs and undesirables.\" He criticized Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1954, calling him a \"poet.\" \"He uses poetic license to try to create the beautifully ordered world of good guys and bad guys that he wants,\" said Capp. \"He seems at his best when terrifying the helpless and naïve.\"\n\nCapp received the National Cartoonists Society's Billy DeBeck Memorial Award in 1947 for Cartoonist of the Year. (When the award name was changed in 1954, Capp also retroactively received a Reuben statuette.) He was an outspoken pioneer in favor of diversifying the NCS by admitting women cartoonists. Originally, the Society had disallowed female members. Capp briefly resigned his membership in 1949 to protest their refusal of admission to Hilda Terry, creator of the comic strip \"Teena\". According to Tom Roberts, author of \"Alex Raymond: His Life and Art\" (2007), Capp delivered a stirring speech that was instrumental in changing those rules. The NCS finally accepted female members the following year. In December 1952, Capp published an article in \"Real\" magazine titled “The REAL Powers in America” that further challenged the conventional attitudes of the day: \"The real powers in America are \"women\"—the wives and sweethearts behind the masculine dummies ...\"\n\nHighlights of the 1950s included the much-heralded marriage of Abner and Daisy Mae in 1952, the birth of their son \"Honest Abe\" Yokum in 1953, and in 1954, the introduction of Abner's enormous, long lost kid brother Tiny Yokum, who filled Abner's place as a bachelor in the annual Sadie Hawkins Day race. In 1952, Capp and his characters graced the covers of both \"Life\" and \"TV Guide\". 1956 saw the debut of the Bald Iggle, considered by some \"Abner\" enthusiasts to be the creative high point of the strip, as well as Mammy's revelatory encounter with the \"Square Eyes\" Family—Capp’s thinly-veiled appeal for racial tolerance. (This fable-like story was collected into an educational comic book called \"Mammy Yokum and the Great Dogpatch Mystery!\", and distributed by the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith later that year.) Two years later, Capp's studio issued \"Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story\", a biographical comic book distributed by the Fellowship of Reconciliation.\n\nCapp had often parodied corporate greed—pork tycoon J. Roaringham Fatback had figured prominently in wiping out the Shmoos. But in 1952, when General Motors president Charles E. Wilson, nominated for a cabinet post, told Congress \"... what was good for the country was good for General Motors and vice versa,\" he inspired one of Capp's greatest satires—the introduction of General Bullmoose, the robust, ruthless, and ageless business tycoon. The blustering Bullmoose, who seemed to own and control nearly everything, justified his far-reaching and mercenary excesses by saying \"What's good for General Bullmoose is good for \"everybody!\"\" Bullmoose's corrupt interests were often pitted against those of the pathetic Lower Slobbovians in a classic mismatch of \"haves\" versus \"have-nots\". This character, along with the Shmoos, helped cement Capp's favor with the Left, and would increase their outrage a decade later when Capp, a former Franklin D. Roosevelt liberal, switched targets. Nonetheless, General Bullmoose continued to appear, undaunted and unredeemed, during the strip's final right-wing phase and into the 1970s.\n\nAfter Capp quit his ghosting job on Ham Fisher's \"Joe Palooka\" in 1934 to launch his own strip, Fisher badmouthed him to colleagues and editors, claiming that Capp had \"stolen\" his idea. For years, Fisher would bring the characters back to his strip, billing them as \"The ORIGINAL Hillbilly Characters\" and advising readers not to be \"fooled by imitations.\" (In fact, Fisher's brutish hillbilly character—Big Leviticus, created by Capp in Fisher's absence—bore little resemblance to Li'l Abner.) According to a November 1950 \"Time\" article, \"Capp parted from Fisher with a definite impression, (to put it mildly) that he had been underpaid and unappreciated. Fisher, a man of Roman self esteem, considered Capp an ingrate and a whippersnapper, and watched his rise to fame with unfeigned horror.\"\n\n\"Fisher repeatedly brought Leviticus and his clan back, claiming their primacy as comics' first hillbilly family — but he was missing the point. It wasn't the setting that made Capp's strip such a huge success. It was Capp's finely tuned sense of the absurd, his ability to milk an outrageous situation for every laugh in it and then, impossibly, to squeeze even more laughs from it, that found such favor with the public,\" (from Don Markstein's \"Toonopedia\").\n\nThe Capp-Fisher feud was well known in cartooning circles, and it grew more personal as Capp's strip eclipsed \"Joe Palooka\" in popularity. Fisher hired away Capp's top assistant, Moe Leff. After Fisher underwent plastic surgery, Capp included a racehorse in \"Li'l Abner\" named \"Ham's Nose-Bob.\" In 1950, Capp introduced a cartoonist character named \"Happy Vermin\"—a caricature of Fisher—who hired Abner to draw his comic strip in a dimly lit closet, (after sacking his previous \"temporary\" assistant of 20 years, who had been cut off from all his friends in the process). Instead of using Vermin's tired characters, Abner inventively peopled the strip with hillbillies. A bighearted Vermin told his slaving assistant: \"I'm proud of having created these characters!! They'll make millions for me!! And if they do — I'll get \"you\" a new light bulb!!\"\n\nTraveling in the same social circles, the two men engaged in a 20-year mutual vendetta, as described by the \"New York Daily News\" in 1998: \"They crossed paths often, in the midtown watering holes and at National Cartoonists Society banquets, and the city's gossip columns were full of their snarling public donnybrooks.\" In 1950, Capp wrote a nasty article for \"The Atlantic\", titled \"I Remember Monster.\" The article recounted Capp's days working for an unnamed \"benefactor\" with a miserly, swinish personality, who Capp claimed was a never-ending source of inspiration when it came time to create a new unregenerate villain for his comic strip. The thinly-veiled boss was understood to be Ham Fisher.\n\nFisher retaliated clumsily, doctoring photostats of \"Li'l Abner\" and falsely accusing Capp of sneaking obscenities into his comic strip. Fisher submitted examples of \"Li'l Abner\" to Capp's syndicate and to the New York courts, in which Fisher had identified pornographic images that were hidden in the background art. However, the X-rated material had actually been drawn there by Fisher. Capp was able to refute the accusation by simply showing the original artwork.\n\nIn 1954, when Capp was applying for a Boston television license, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) received an anonymous packet of pornographic \"Li'l Abner\" drawings. The National Cartoonists Society (NCS) convened an ethics hearing, and Fisher was expelled for the forgery from the same organization that he had helped found; Fisher's scheme had backfired in spectacular fashion. Around the same time, his mansion in Wisconsin was destroyed by a nor'easter. On December 27, 1955, Fisher committed suicide in his studio. The feud and Fisher's suicide were used as the basis for a lurid, highly fictionalized murder mystery, \"Strip for Murder\" by Max Allan Collins.\n\nAnother \"feud\" seemed to be looming when, in one run of Sunday strips in 1957, Capp lampooned the comic strip \"Mary Worth\" as \"Mary Worm.\" The title character was depicted as a nosy, interfering busybody. Allen Saunders, the creator of the \"Mary Worth\" strip, returned Capp's fire with the introduction of the character \"Hal Rapp,\" a foul-tempered, ill-mannered, and (ironically) inebriated cartoonist, (Capp was a teetotaler). Later, it was revealed to be a collaborative hoax that Capp and his longtime pal Saunders had cooked up together. The Capp-Saunders \"feud\" fooled both editors and readers, generated plenty of free publicity for both strips—and Capp and Saunders had a good laugh when all was revealed.\n\nCapp is often associated with two other giants of the medium: Milton Caniff (\"Terry and the Pirates\", \"Steve Canyon\") and Walt Kelly (\"Pogo\"). The three cartoonists were close personal friends and professional associates throughout their adult lives, and occasionally referenced each other in their strips. According to one anecdote (from \"Al Capp Remembered\", 1994), Capp and his brother Elliot ducked out of a dull party at Capp's home—leaving Walt Kelly alone to fend for himself entertaining a group of Argentine envoys who didn't speak English. Kelly retaliated by giving away Capp's baby grand piano. According to Capp, who loved to relate the story, Kelly's two perfectly logical reasons for doing so were: a. to cement diplomatic relations between Argentina and the United States, and b. \"Because you can't play the piano, anyway!\" (\"Beetle Bailey\" creator Mort Walker confirmed the story, relating a slightly expanded version in his autobiography, \"Mort Walker's Private Scrapbook\", 2001.)\n\nMilton Caniff offered another anecdote (from \"Phi Beta Pogo\", 1989) involving Capp and Walt Kelly, \"two boys from Bridgeport, Connecticut, nose to nose,\" onstage at a meeting of the Newspaper Comics Council in the sixties. \"Walt would say to Al, 'Of course, Al, this is really how you should draw Daisy Mae, I'm only showing you this for your own good.' Then Walt would do a sketch. Capp, of course, got ticked off by this, as you can imagine! So he retaliated by doing \"his\" version of Pogo. Unfortunately, the drawings are long gone; no recording was made. What a shame! Nobody anticipated there'd be this dueling back and forth between the two of them ...\"\n\nAlthough he was often considered a difficult person, some acquaintances of Capp have stressed that the cartoonist also had a sensitive side; in 1973, when learning that the son of his political rival Ted Kennedy had had his right leg amputated, Capp wrote the boy a letter of encouragement, giving candid advice as to how to deal with the loss of a limb, which he himself had experienced as a boy. One of Capp's grandchildren recalls that at one point, tears were streaming down the cartoonist's cheeks while he was watching a documentary about the Jonestown massacre. Capp is also reported to have given money anonymously to charities and \"people in need\" at various points in his life.\n\nIn her autobiography, American actress Goldie Hawn stated that Capp sexually propositioned her on a casting couch and exposed himself to her when she was nineteen years old. When she refused his advances, Capp became angry and told her that she was \"never gonna make anything in your life\" and that she should \"go and marry a Jewish dentist. You'll never get anywhere in this business.\"\n\nLike many cartoonists, Capp made extensive use of assistants (notably Andy Amato, Harvey Curtis, Walter Johnson and Frank Frazetta). During the extended peak of the strip, the workload grew to include advertising, merchandising, promotional work, public service comics and other specialty work—in addition to the regular six dailies and one Sunday strip per week. From the early 1940s to the late 1950s, there were scores of Sunday strip-style magazine ads for Cream of Wheat using the \"Abner\" characters, and in the 1950s, Fearless Fosdick became a spokesman for Wildroot Cream-Oil hair tonic in a series of daily strip-style print ads. The characters also sold chainsaws, underwear, ties, detergent, candy, soft drinks—including a licensed version of Capp's moonshine creation, Kickapoo Joy Juice—and General Electric and Procter & Gamble products, all requiring special artwork.\n\nNo matter how much help he had, Capp insisted on drawing and inking the characters' faces and hands—especially of Abner and Daisy Mae—himself, and his distinctive touch is often discernible. \"He had \"the touch,\"\" Frazetta said of Capp in 2008. \"He knew how to take an otherwise ordinary drawing and really make it \"pop\". I'll never knock his talent.\"\n\nAs is usual with collaborative efforts in comic strips, his name was the only one credited— although, sensitive to his own experience working on \"Joe Palooka\", Capp frequently drew attention to his assistants in interviews and publicity pieces. A 1950 cover story in \"Time\" even included photos of two of his employees, whose roles in the production were detailed by Capp. Ironically, this highly irregular policy (along with the subsequent fame of Frank Frazetta) has led to the misconception that his strip was \"ghosted\" by other hands. The production of \"Li'l Abner\" has been well documented, however. In point of fact, Capp maintained creative control over every stage of production for virtually the entire run of the strip. Capp himself originated the stories, wrote the dialogue, designed the major characters, rough penciled the preliminary staging and action of each panel, oversaw the finished pencils, and drew and inked the hands and faces of the characters. Frazetta authority David Winiewicz described the everyday working mode of operation in \"Li'l Abner Dailies: 1954 Volume 20\" (Kitchen Sink, 1994):\n\nThere was also a separate line of comic book titles published by the Caplin family-owned Toby Press, including \"Shmoo Comics\" featuring Washable Jones. Cartoonist Mell Lazarus, creator of \"Miss Peach\" and \"Momma\", wrote a comic novel in 1963 titled \"The Boss Is Crazy, Too\" which was partly inspired by his apprenticeship days working with Capp and his brother Elliot at Toby. In a seminar at the Charles Schulz Museum on November 8, 2008, Lazarus called his experience at Toby \"the five funniest years of my life.\" Lazarus went on to cite Capp as one of the \"four essentials\" in the field of newspaper cartoonists, along with Walt Kelly, Charles Schulz and Milton Caniff.\n\nCapp detailed his approach to writing and drawing the stories in an instructional course book for the Famous Artists School, beginning in 1956. In 1959, Capp recorded and released an album for Folkways Records (now owned by the Smithsonian) on which he identified and described \"The Mechanics of the Comic Strip.\"\n\nFrazetta, later famous as a fantasy artist, assisted on the strip from 1954 to December, 1961. Fascinated by Frazetta's abilities, Capp initially gave him a free hand in an extended daily sequence (about a biker named \"Frankie,\" a caricature of Frazetta) to experiment with the basic look of the strip by adding a bit more realism and detail (particularly to the inking). After editors complained about the stylistic changes, the strip's previous look was restored. During most of his tenure with Capp, Frazetta's primary responsibility—along with various specialty art, such as a series of \"Li'l Abner\" greeting cards—was tight-penciling the Sunday pages from studio roughs. This work was collected by Dark Horse Comics in a four-volume hardcover series entitled \"Al Capp's Li'l Abner: The Frazetta Years\". In 1961, Capp, complaining of declining revenue, wanted to have Frazetta continue with a 50% pay cut. \"[Capp] said he would cut the salary in half. Goodbye. That was that. \"I\" said goodbye,\" (from \"Frazetta: Painting with Fire\"). However, Frazetta returned briefly a few years later to draw a public service comic book called \"Li'l Abner and the Creatures from Drop-Outer Space\", distributed by the Job Corps in 1965.\n\nCapp provided specialty artwork for civic groups, government agencies and charitable or non-profit organizations, spanning several decades. The following titles are all single-issue, educational comic books and pamphlets produced for various public services:\n\n\nIn addition, Dogpatch characters were used in national campaigns for the U.S. Treasury, the Cancer Foundation, the March of Dimes, the National Heart Fund, the Sister Kenny Foundation, the Boy Scouts of America, Community Chest, the National Reading Council, Minnesota Tuberculosis and Health Association, Christmas Seals, the National Amputation Foundation and Disabled American Veterans, among others.\n\nIn the Golden Age of the American comic strip, successful cartoonists received a great deal of attention; their professional and private lives were reported in the press, and their celebrity was often nearly sufficient to rival their creations. As \"Li'l Abner\" reached its peak years, and following the success of the Shmoos and other high moments in his work, Al Capp achieved a public profile that is still unparalleled in his profession, and arguably exceeded the fame of his strip. \"Capp was the best known, most influential and most controversial cartoonist of his era,\" writes publisher (and leading Shmoo collector) Denis Kitchen. \"His personal celebrity transcended comics, reaching the public and influencing the culture in a variety of media. For many years he simultaneously produced the daily strip, a weekly syndicated newspaper column, and a 500-station radio program...\" He ran the Boston Summer Theatre with \"The Phantom\" cartoonist Lee Falk, bringing in Hollywood actors such as Mae West, Melvyn Douglas and Claude Rains to star in their live productions. He even briefly considered running for a Massachusetts Senate seat. Vice President Spiro Agnew urged Capp to run in the Democratic Party Massachusetts primary in 1970 against Ted Kennedy, but Capp ultimately declined. (He did, however, donate his services as a speaker at a $100-a-plate fundraiser for Republican Congressman Jack Kemp.)\n\nBesides his use of the comic strip to voice his opinions and display his humor, Capp was a popular guest speaker at universities, and on radio and television. He remains the only cartoonist to be embraced by TV; no other comic artist to date has come close to Capp's televised exposure. Capp appeared as a regular on \"The Author Meets the Critics\" (1948–'54) and made regular, weekly appearances on \"Today\" in 1953. He was also a periodic panelist on ABC and NBC's \"Who Said That?\" (1948–'55), and co-hosted DuMont's \"What's the Story?\" (1953). Between 1952 and 1972, he hosted at least \"five\" television shows–three different talk shows called \"The Al Capp Show\" (1952 and 1968) and \"Al Capp\" (1971–'72), \"Al Capp's America\" (a live \"chalk talk,\" with Capp providing a barbed commentary while sketching cartoons, 1954), and a CBS game show called \"Anyone Can Win\" (1953). He also hosted similar vehicles on the radio—and was a familiar celebrity guest on various other broadcast programs, including the long-running NBC Radio Monitor Beacon as a commentator dubbed \"An expert of nothing with opinions on everything\", \"Monitor\".\n\nHis frequent appearances on NBC's \"The Tonight Show\" spanned three emcees (Steve Allen, Jack Paar and Johnny Carson), from the 1950s to the 1970s. One memorable story, as recounted to Johnny Carson, was about his meeting with then-President Dwight D. Eisenhower. As Capp was ushered into the Oval Office, his prosthetic leg suddenly collapsed into a pile of disengaged parts and hinges on the floor. The President immediately turned to an aide and said, \"Call Walter Reed (Hospital), or maybe Bethesda,\" to which Capp replied, \"Hell no, just call a good local mechanic!\" (Capp also spoofed Carson in his strip, in a 1970 episode called \"The Tommy Wholesome Show.\")\n\nCapp portrayed himself in a cameo role in the Bob Hope film \"That Certain Feeling\", for which he also provided promotional art. He was interviewed live on \"Person to Person\" on November 27, 1959 by host Charles Collingwood. He also appeared as himself on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\", Sid Caesar's \"Your Show of Shows\", \"The Red Skelton Show\", \"The Merv Griffin Show\", \"The Mike Douglas Show\", and guested on Ralph Edwards' \"This Is Your Life\" on February 12, 1961 with honoree Peter Palmer. Capp also freelanced very successfully as a magazine writer and newspaper columnist, in a wide variety of publications including \"Life\", \"Show\", \"Pageant\", \"The Atlantic\", \"Esquire\", \"Coronet\", and \"The Saturday Evening Post\". Capp was impersonated by comedians Rich Little and David Frye. Although Capp's endorsement activities never rivaled Li'l Abner's or Fearless Fosdick's, he was a celebrity spokesman in print ads for Sheaffer Snorkel fountain pens (along with colleagues and close friends Milton Caniff and Walt Kelly), and—with an irony that would become apparent later—a brand of cigarettes, (Chesterfield).\n\nCapp would resume visiting war amputees during the Korean War and Vietnam War. He toured Vietnam with the USO, entertaining troops along with Art Buchwald and George Plimpton. He served as chairman of the Cartoonists' Committee in President Dwight D. Eisenhower's People-to-People program in 1954 (although Capp had actually supported Adlai Stevenson for president in 1952 and 1956), which was organized to promote Savings bonds for the U.S. Treasury. Capp had earlier provided the Shmoo for a special Children's Savings Bond in 1949, accompanying President Harry S. Truman at the bond's unveiling ceremony. During the Soviet Union's blockade of West Berlin in 1948, the commanders of the Berlin airlift had cabled Capp, requesting inflatable shmoos as part of \"Operation: Little Vittles.\" Candy-filled shmoos were air-dropped to hungry West Berliners by America's 17th Military Airport Squadron during the humanitarian effort. \"When the candy-chocked shmoos were dropped, a near-riot resulted,\" (reported in \"Newsweek\"—October 11, 1948).\n\nIn addition to his public service work for charitable organizations for the handicapped, Capp also served on the National Reading Council, which was organized to combat illiteracy. He published a column (\"Wrong Turn Onto Sesame Street\") challenging federally funded Public Television endowments in favor of educational comics—which, according to Capp, \"didn't cost a dime in taxes and never had. I pointed out that a kid could enjoy \"Sesame Street\" \"without\" learning how to read, but he couldn't enjoy comic strips \"unless\" he could read; and that a smaller investment in getting kids to read by supplying them with educational matter in such \"reading\" form might make better sense.\"\n\nCapp's academic interests included being one of nineteen original \"Trustees and Advisors\" for \"Endicott, Junior College for Young Woman\", located in Pride's Crossing (Beverly), Massachusetts, which was founded in 1939. Al Capp is listed in the 1942 Mingotide Yearbook, representing the first graduating class from Endicott Junior College. The yearbook entry includes his credential as a \"Cartoonist for United Feature Syndicate\" and a resident of New York City.\n\n\"Comics,” wrote Capp in 1970, “can be a combination of the highest quality of art and text, and many of them are.” Capp would produce many giveaway educational comic books and public services pamphlets, spanning several decades, for the Red Cross, the Department of Civil Defense, the Department of the Navy, the U.S. Army, the Anti-Defamation League, the Department of Labor, Community Chest (a forerunner of United Way), and the Job Corps. Capp's studio provided special artwork for various civic groups and non-profit organizations as well. Dogpatch characters were used in national campaigns for the Cancer Foundation, the March of Dimes, the National Heart Fund, the Boy Scouts of America, Minnesota Tuberculosis and Health Association, the National Amputation Foundation, and Disabled American Veterans, among others. They were also used to help sell Christmas Seals.\nCapp was the \"Playboy\" interview subject in December 1965, in a conversation conducted by Alvin Toffler. In August 1967 Capp was the narrator and host of an ABC network special called \"Do Blondes Have More Fun?\" In 1970, he was the subject of a provocative NBC documentary called \"This Is Al Capp.\" In the early 1960s, Capp regularly wrote a column entitled \"Al Capp's Column\" for the New York newspaper \"The Schenectady Gazette\" (currently The Daily Gazette).\n\nCapp and his family lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts near Harvard during the entire Vietnam War protest era. The turmoil that Americans were watching on their TV sets was happening live—right in his own neighborhood. Campus radicals and “hippies” inevitably became one of Capp’s favorite targets in the sixties. Alongside his long-established caricatures of right-wing, big business types such as General Bullmoose and J. Roaringham Fatback, Capp began spoofing counterculture icons such as Joan Baez (in the character of Joanie Phoanie, a wealthy folksinger who offers an impoverished orphanage ten thousand dollars' worth of \"protest songs\"). The sequence implicitly labeled Baez a limousine liberal, a charge she took to heart, as detailed years later in her 1987 autobiography, \"And A Voice To Sing With: A Memoir\". Another target was Senator Ted Kennedy, parodied as \"Senator O. Noble McGesture,\" resident of \"Hyideelsport.\" The town name is a play on Hyannisport, Massachusetts, where a number of the Kennedy clan have lived.\n\nCapp became a popular public speaker on college campuses, where he reportedly relished hecklers. He attacked militant antiwar demonstrators, both in his personal appearances and in his strip. He also satirized student political groups. The Youth International Party (YIP) and Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) emerged in \"Li'l Abner\" as \"Students Wildly Indignant about Nearly Everything!\" (SWINE). In an April 1969 letter to \"Time\", Capp insisted, \"The students I blast are not the dissenters, but the destroyers—the less than 4% who lock up deans in washrooms, who burn manuscripts of unpublished books, who make combination pigpens and playpens of their universities. The remaining 96% detest them as heartily as I do.\"\n\nCapp's increasingly controversial remarks at his campus speeches and during TV appearances cost him his semi-regular spot on the \"Tonight Show\". His contentious public persona during this period was captured on a late sixties comedy LP called \"Al Capp On Campus\". The album features his interaction with students at Fresno State College (now California State University, Fresno) on such topics as \"sensitivity training,\" \"humanitarianism,\" \"abstract art\" (Capp hated it), and \"student protest.\" The cover features a cartoon drawing by Capp of wildly dressed, angry hippies carrying protest signs with slogans like \"End Capp Brutality,\" \"Abner and Daisy Mae Smoke Pot,\" \"Capp Is Over [30, 40, 50—all crossed out] the Hill!!,\" and \"If You Like Crap, You'll Like Capp!\"\n\nHighlights of the strip's final decades include \"Boomchik\" (1961), in which America's international prestige is saved by Mammy Yokum, \"Daisy Mae Steps Out\" (1966), a female-empowering tale of Daisy's brazenly audacious “homewrecker gland,\" \"The Lips of Marcia Perkins\" (1967), a satirical, thinly-veiled commentary on venereal disease and public health warnings, \"Ignoble Savages\" (1968), in which the Mob takes over Harvard, and \"Corporal Crock\" (1973), in which Bullmoose reveals his reactionary cartoon role model, in a tale of obsession and the fanatical world of comic book collecting.\n\nThe cartoonist visited John Lennon and Yoko Ono at their 1969 Bed-In for Peace in Montreal, and their testy exchange later appeared in the documentary film \"\" (1988). Introducing himself with the words \"I'm a dreadful Neanderthal fascist. How do you do?,\" Capp sardonically congratulated Lennon and Ono on their \"\" nude album cover: \"I think that everybody owes it to the world to prove they have pubic hair. You've done it, and I tell you that I applaud you for it.\" Following this exchange, Capp insulted Ono (\"Good God, you've gotta live with that?\"), and is asked to \"get out\" by Derek Taylor. Lennon allowed him to stay however, but the conversation had soured considerably. On Capp's exit, Lennon sang an impromptu version of his \"Ballad of John and Yoko\" song with a slightly revised, but nonetheless prophetic lyric: \"Christ, you know it ain't easy / You know how hard it can be / The way things are goin' / They're gonna crucify \"Capp!\" \"\n\nDespite his political conservatism in the last decade of his life, Capp is reported to have been liberal in some particular causes; he supported Gay Rights, and did not tolerate any attempts at homophobic jokes. He is also said to have supported Martin Luther King, Jr. and the fight for racial equality in American society, although he was very sceptical of the tactics of Black Panthers and Malcolm X.\n\nIn 1968, a theme park called Dogpatch USA opened at Marble Falls, Arkansas, based on Capp's work and with his support. The park was a popular attraction during the 1970s but was abandoned in 1993 due to financial difficulties. By 2005, the area once devoted to a live-action facsimile of Dogpatch (including a lifesize statue in the town square of Dogpatch \"founder,\" General Jubilation T. Cornpone) had been heavily stripped by vandals and souvenir hunters, and was slowly being reclaimed by the surrounding Arkansas wilderness.\n\nOn April 22, 1971, syndicated columnist Jack Anderson reported allegations that Capp made indecent advances to four female students when he was invited to speak at the University of Alabama in February 1968. Anderson and his associate Brit Hume confirmed that Capp was shown out of town by university police, but that the incident had been hushed up by the university to avoid negative publicity.\n\nThe following month, Capp was charged in Eau Claire, Wisconsin in connection with another alleged incident following his April 1 lecture at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. Capp was accused of propositioning a married woman in his hotel room. Although no sexual act was alleged to have resulted, the original charge included \"sodomy.\" As part of a plea agreement, Capp pleaded guilty to the charge of \"attempted adultery\" (adultery was a felony in Wisconsin) and the other charges were dropped. Capp was fined $500 and court costs. In a December 1992 article for \"The New Yorker,\" Seymour Hersh reported that President Richard Nixon and Charles Colson had repeatedly discussed the Capp case in Oval Office recordings that had recently been made available by the National Archives. Nixon and Capp were on friendly terms, Hersh wrote, and Nixon and Colson had worked to find a way for Capp to run against Ted Kennedy for the U.S. Senate. \"Nixon was worried about the allegations, fearing that Capp's very close links to the White House would become embarrassingly public,\" Hersh wrote. \"The White House tapes and documents show that he and Colson discussed the issue repeatedly, and that Colson eventually reassured the President by saying that he had, in essence, fixed the case. Specifically, the President was told that one of Colson's people had gone to Wisconsin and tried to talk to the prosecutors.\" Colson's efforts failed, however. The Eau Claire district attorney, a Republican, refused to dismiss the attempted adultery charge. In passing sentence in February 1972, the judge rejected the D.A.'s motion that Capp agree to undergo psychiatric treatment.\n\nThe resulting publicity led to hundreds of papers dropping his comic strip, and Capp, already in failing health, withdrew from public speaking. Celebrity biographer James Spada has claimed that similar allegations were made by actress Grace Kelly. However, no firsthand allegation has ever surfaced.\n\n\"From beginning to end, Capp was acid-tongued toward the targets of his wit, intolerant of hypocrisy, and always wickedly funny. After about 40 years, however, Capp's interest in \"Abner\" waned, and this showed in the strip itself,\" according to Don Markstein's \"Toonopedia\". On November 13, 1977, Capp retired with an apology to his fans for the recently declining quality of the strip, which he said had been the best he could manage due to declining health. \"If you have any sense of humor about your strip—and I had a sense of humor about mine—you knew that for three or four years \"Abner\" was wrong. Oh hell, it's like a fighter retiring. I stayed on longer than I should have,\" he admitted, adding that he couldn't breathe anymore. \"When he retired \"Li'l Abner\", newspapers ran expansive articles and television commentators talked about the passing of an era. \"People magazine\" ran a substantial feature, and even the comics-free \"New York Times\" devoted nearly a full page to the event,\" wrote publisher Denis Kitchen.\n\nCapp's final years were marked by advancing illness and by family tragedy. In October 1977, one of his two daughters died; a few weeks later, a beloved granddaughter was killed in a car accident. A lifelong chain smoker, Capp died in 1979 from emphysema at his home in South Hampton, New Hampshire. Capp is buried in Mount Prospect Cemetery in Amesbury, Massachusetts. Engraved on his headstone is a stanza from Thomas Gray: \"The plowman homeward plods his weary way / And leaves the world to darkness and to me,\" (from \"Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard,\" 1751).\n\n\"Neither the strip's shifting political leanings nor the slide of its final few years had any bearing on its status as a classic; and in 1995, it was recognized as such by the U.S. Postal Service,\" according to \"Toonopedia\". \"Li'l Abner\" was one of 20 American comic strips included in the Comic Strip Classics series of USPS commemorative stamps. Al Capp, an inductee into the National Cartoon Museum (formerly the International Museum of Cartoon Art), is one of only 31 artists selected to their Hall of Fame. Capp was also inducted into the Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame in 2004.\n\nSadie Hawkins Day and double whammy are two terms attributed to Al Capp that have entered the English language. Other, less ubiquitous Cappisms include skunk works and Lower Slobbovia. The term shmoo has also entered the lexicon, defining highly technical concepts in no less than \"four\" separate fields of science, including the variations shmooing (a microbiological term for the \"budding\" process in yeast reproduction), and shmoo plot (a technical term in the field of electrical engineering). In socioeconomics, a \"shmoo\" refers to any generic kind of good that reproduces itself, (as opposed to \"widgets\" which require resources and active production.) In the field of particle physics, \"shmoo\" refers to a high energy survey instrument, as utilized at the Los Alamos National Laboratory to capture subatomic cosmic ray particles emitted from the Cygnus X-3 constellation. Capp also had a knack for popularizing certain uncommon terms, such as druthers, schmooze and nogoodnik, neatnik, etc. In his book \"The American Language\", H.L. Mencken credits the postwar mania for adding \"-nik\" to the ends of adjectives to create nouns as beginning—not with beatnik or Sputnik—but earlier, in the pages of \"Li'l Abner\".\n\nAl Capp's life and career are the subjects of a new life-sized mural commemorating his 100th birthday. Created by resident artist Jon P. Mooers, the mural was unveiled in downtown Amesbury on May 15, 2010. According to the \"Boston Globe\" (as reported on May 18, 2010), the town has renamed its amphitheater in the artist's honor, and is looking to develop an Al Capp Museum. Capp is also the subject of an upcoming WNET-TV \"American Masters\" documentary, \"The Life and Times of Al Capp\", produced by his granddaughter, independent filmmaker Caitlin Manning.\n\nSince his death in 1979, Al Capp and his work have been the subject of more than 40 books, including three biographies. Underground cartoonist and \"Li'l Abner\" expert Denis Kitchen has published, co-published, edited, or otherwise served as consultant on nearly all of them. Kitchen is currently compiling a biographical monograph on Al Capp.\n\nAt the San Diego Comic Con in July 2009, IDW announced the upcoming publication of \"Al Capp's Li'l Abner: The Complete Dailies and Color Sundays\" as part of their ongoing Library of American Comics project. The comprehensive series, a reprinting of the entire 43-year history of \"Li'l Abner\" spanning a projected 20 volumes, began on April 7, 2010.\n\n"}
{"id": "3013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3013", "title": "Ann Druyan", "text": "Ann Druyan\n\nAnn Druyan ( ; born June 13, 1949) is an American writer and producer specializing in the communication of science. She co-wrote the 1980 PBS documentary series \"\", hosted by Carl Sagan, whom she married in 1981. She is the creator, producer, and writer of the 2014 sequel, \"\".\n\nShe was the Creative Director of NASA's Voyager Interstellar Message Project, the golden discs affixed to both the Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 spacecraft.\n\nDruyan was born in Queens, New York, the daughter of Pearl A. (\"née\" Goldsmith) and Harry Druyan, who co-owned a knitware firm.\n\nDruyan's first novel, \"A Famous Broken Heart\", was published in 1977.\n\nDruyan co-wrote six \"New York Times\" best-sellers with Carl Sagan, including: \"Comet\", \"Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors\", and \"The Demon-Haunted World\". She is co-author, along with Carl Sagan, F. D. Drake, Timothy Ferris, Jon Lomberg and Linda Salzman Sagan, of \"Murmurs Of Earth : The Voyager Interstellar Record\". She also wrote the updated introduction to Sagan's book \"The Cosmic Connection\", and the epilogue of \"Billions and Billions\". She edited and wrote the introduction to a book of Sagan's 1985 Gifford lectures, \"The Varieties of Scientific Experience\".\n\nAs creative director of NASA's Voyager Interstellar Message Project, Druyan worked with a team to design a complex message, including music and images, for possible alien civilizations. These golden phonograph records affixed to the \"Voyager 1\" and \"Voyager 2\" spacecraft are now beyond the outermost planets of the solar system and \"Voyager 1\" has entered interstellar space. Both records have a projected shelf life of one billion years.\n\nDruyan is a fellow of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims for the Paranormal (CSICOP).\n\nDruyan served as program director of the first solar sail deep space mission, Cosmos 1, launched on a Russian ICBM in 2005.\n\nDruyan is involved in multiple Breakthrough Initiatives. With Frank Drake, Druyan is the co-chair of Breakthrough Message, and she is also a member of Breakthrough Starshot.\n\nShe is a member of the advisory board of The Carl Sagan Institute.\n\nDruyan wrote and produced the 1987 PBS NOVA episode \"Confessions of a Weaponeer\" on the life of President Eisenhower's Science Advisor, George Kistiakowsky.\n\nIn 2000, Druyan co-founded Cosmos Studios, Inc, with Joseph Firmage. As CEO of Cosmos Studios, Druyan produces science-based entertainment for all media. In addition to \",\" Cosmos Studios has produced \"Cosmic Africa\", \"Lost Dinosaurs of Egypt\", and the Emmy-nominated documentary \"Cosmic Journey: The Voyager Interstellar Mission and Message\".\n\nDruyan was one of the three writers of the TV series \"\", along with Carl Sagan and Steven Soter, and a producer for the motion picture \"Contact\".\n\nDruyan is the chief executive officer and the co-founder of Cosmos Studios. In 2009, she distributed a series of podcasts called \"At Home in the Cosmos with Annie Druyan\" in which she described her works, the life of her husband, Carl Sagan, and their marriage.\n\nIn 2011, it was announced that Druyan would be part of the writing and production teams for a sequel to \"\", to be called \"\", which began airing in March 2014. Episodes premiered on Fox and also aired on National Geographic Channel on the same night.\n\nDruyan has served on the Board of Directors of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) for over 10 years and was president from 2006 to 2010.\n\nIn November 2006, Druyan was a speaker at \"\".\n\nIn January 2007, she was a juror at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival, responsible for selecting the winner of the Alfred P. Sloan Prize for films about science and technology.\n\nIn an interview with Joel Achenbach of \"The Washington Post\", Druyan stated that her early interest in science stemmed from a fascination with Karl Marx. Achenbach commented that \"She had, at the time, rather vaporous standards of evidence,\" a reference to her belief in the ancient astronauts of Erich von Däniken and the theories of Immanuel Velikovsky pertaining to the Solar System. Druyan freely acknowledged her past views and also said that they after marrying Carl Sagan.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3014", "title": "Analcime", "text": "Analcime\n\nAnalcime or analcite (from the Greek \"analkimos\" - \"weak\") is a white, gray, or colorless tectosilicate mineral. Analcime consists of hydrated sodium aluminium silicate in cubic crystalline form. Its chemical formula is NaAlSiO·HO. Minor amounts of potassium and calcium substitute for sodium. A silver-bearing synthetic variety also exists (Ag-analcite).\n\nAnalcime is usually classified as a zeolite mineral, but structurally and chemically it is more similar to the feldspathoids. Analcime occurs as a primary mineral in analcime basalt and other alkaline igneous rocks. It also occurs as cavity and vesicle fillings associated with prehnite, calcite, and zeolites. \n\nWell known locations for sourcing analcime include Croft Quarry in Leicestershire, UK; the Cyclopean Islands east off Sicily and near Trentino in northern Italy; Victoria in Australia; Kerguelen Island in the Indian Ocean; in the Lake Superior copper district of Michigan, Bergen Hill, New Jersey, Golden, Colorado, and at Searles Lake, California in the United States; and at Cape Blomidon, Nova Scotia and Mont Saint-Hilaire, Quebec in Canada; and in Iceland.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3017", "title": "Alexey Pajitnov", "text": "Alexey Pajitnov\n\nAlexey Leonidovich Pajitnov (, ; ; born 14 March 1956) is a Russian video game designer and computer engineer who developed \"Tetris\" while working for the Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, a Soviet government-founded R&D center.\n\nHe only started to get royalties from his creation in 1996 when he and Henk Rogers formed The Tetris Company.\n\nPajitnov was born on 14 March 1956 in Moscow, Soviet Union. As a child, he was a fan of puzzles and played with pentomino toys. In creating \"Tetris,\" he drew inspiration from these toys.\n\nPajitnov created \"Tetris\" with the help of Dmitry Pavlovsky and Vadim Gerasimov in 1984. The game, first available in the Soviet Union, appeared in the West in 1986.\n\nPajitnov also created a sequel to \"Tetris\", entitled \"Welltris\", which has the same principle but in a three dimensional environment where the player sees the playing area from above. \"Tetris\" was licensed and managed by Soviet company ELORG which had been founded especially for this purpose, and advertised with the slogan \"\"From Russia with Love\"\" (on NES: \"\"From Russia With Fun!\"\"). Because he was employed by the Soviet government, Pajitnov did not receive royalties.\n\nPajitnov, together with Vladimir Pokhilko, moved to the United States in 1991 and later, in 1996, founded The Tetris Company with Henk Rogers. He helped design the puzzles in the Super NES versions of \"Yoshi's Cookie\" and designed the game \"Pandora's Box\", which incorporates more traditional jigsaw-style puzzles.\n\nHe was employed by Microsoft from October 1996 until 2005. While there he worked on the \"\", MSN Mind Aerobics and MSN Games groups. Pajitnov's new, enhanced version of \"Hexic\", \"Hexic HD\", was included with every new Xbox 360 Premium package.\n\nOn 18 August 2005, WildSnake Software announced that Pajitnov would be collaborating with them to release a new line of puzzle games.\n\nIn 1996, GameSpot named him as the fourth most influential computer game developer of all time.\n\nOn 7 March 2007, he received the Game Developers Choice Awards First Penguin Award. The award was given for pioneering the casual games market.\n\nOn 24 June 2009, he received the honorary award at the LARA - Der Deutsche Games Award in Cologne, Germany.\n\nIn 2012, IGN included Pajitnov on their list of 5 Memorable Video Game Industry One-Hit Wonders, calling him \"the ultimate video game one-hit wonder.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3019", "title": "`Abdu'l-Bahá", "text": "`Abdu'l-Bahá\n\n`Abdu’l-Bahá' (Persian/‎, 23 May 1844 – 28 November 1921), born ‘Abbás Effendí (), was the eldest son of Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the Bahá'í Faith. In 1892, `Abdu'l-Bahá was appointed in his father's will to be his successor and head of the Bahá'í Faith. `Abdu'l-Bahá was born in Tehran to an aristocratic family of the realm. At the age of eight his father was imprisoned and the family's possessions were looted, leaving them in virtual poverty. Along with his father, `Abdu'l-Bahá was exiled to Baghdad where the family lived for nine years.\n\nDuring his youth he was faithful to his father and was regarded as an outstanding member of the Bahá’í exile community. As a teenager he was his father’s amanuensis and was regularly seen debating theological issues with the learned men of the area. In 1863, Bahá'u'lláh and his family were banished from Baghdad to Istanbul. During the 1860s the family was further banished from Constantinople to Adrianople, and then finally to the penal-colony of Acre, Palestine.\n\nWith his father's death in 1892, and his appointment as head of the Bahá’í Faith, there was much opposition to him, including virtually all his family members. Notwithstanding this, practically all of the worldwide Bahá’í community accepted his leadership. In 1908, at the age of 64 and after forty years imprisonment, `Abdu’l-Bahá was freed by the Young Turks and he and his family began to live in relative safety. His journeys to the West, and his \"Tablets of the Divine Plan\" spread the Bahá'í message beyond its middle-eastern roots, and his Will and Testament laid the foundation for the current Bahá'í administrative order. Many of his writings, prayers and letters are extant, and his discourses with the Western Bahá'ís emphasize the growth of the faith by the late 1890s. `Abdu'l-Bahá's given name was `Abbás, but he preferred the title of `Abdu'l-Bahá (servant of the glory of God). He is commonly referred to in Bahá'í texts as \"The Master\", and received the title of KBE after his personal storage of grain was used to relieve famine in Palestine following World War I, but never used the title.\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá was born in Tehran, Iran on 23 May 1844 (5th of Jamadiyu'l-Avval, 1260 AH), the eldest son of Bahá'u'lláh and Navváb. He was born on the very same night on which the Báb declared his mission. Born with the given name of `Abbás, he was named after his grandfather Mírzá `Abbás Núrí, a prominent and powerful nobleman. As a child, `Abdu'l-Bahá was shaped by his father's position as a prominent Bábí. He recalled how he met the Bábí Táhirih and how she would take \"me on to her knee, caress me, and talk to me. I admired her most deeply\". `Abdu’l-Bahá had a happy and carefree childhood. The family’s Tehran home and country houses were comfortable and beautifully decorated. `Abdu'l-Bahá enjoyed playing in the gardens with his younger sister with whom he was very close. Along with his younger siblings – a sister, Bahíyyih, and a brother, Mihdí – the three lived in an environment of privilege, happiness and comfort. With his father declining a position as minister of the royal court; during his young boyhood `Abdu’l-Bahá witnessed his parents' various charitable endeavours, which included converting part of the home to a hospital ward for women and children.\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá received a haphazard education during his childhood. It was customary not to send children of nobility to schools. Most noblemen were educated at home briefly in scripture, rhetoric, calligraphy and basic mathematics. Many were educated to prepare themselves for life in the royal court. Despite a brief spell at a traditional preparatory school at the age of seven for one year, `Abdu'l-Bahá received no formal education. As he grew he was educated by his mother, and uncle. Most of his education however, came from his father. Years later in 1890 Edward Granville Browne described how `Abdu'l-Bahá was \"one more eloquent of speech, more ready of argument, more apt of illustration, more intimately acquainted with the sacred books of the Jews, the Christians, and the Muhammadans...scarcely be found even amongst the eloquent.\"\n\nWhen `Abdu'l-Bahá was seven, he contracted tuberculosis and was expected to die. Though the malady faded away, he would be plagued with bouts of illness for the rest of his life.\n\nOne event that affected `Abdu'l-Bahá greatly during his childhood was the imprisonment of his father when `Abdu'l-Bahá was eight years old; the imprisonment led to his family being reduced to poverty and being attacked in the streets by other children. `Abdu'l-Bahá accompanied his mother to visit Bahá'u'lláh who was then imprisoned in the infamous subterranean dungeon the Síyáh-Chál. He described how \"I saw a dark, steep place. We entered a small, narrow doorway, and went down two steps, but beyond those one could see nothing. In the middle of the stairway, all of a sudden we heard His [Bahá’u’lláh's]…voice: 'Do not bring him in here', and so they took me back\".\n\nBahá'u'lláh was eventually released from prison but ordered into exile, and `Abdu'l-Bahá then eight joined his father on the journey to Baghdad in the winter (January to April) of 1853. During the journey `Abdu'l-Bahá suffered from frost-bite. After a year of difficulties Bahá'u'lláh absented himself rather than continue to face the conflict with Mirza Yahya and secretly secluded himself in the mountains of Sulaymaniyah in April 1854 a month before `Abdu'l-Bahá's tenth birthday. Mutual sorrow resulted in him, his mother and sister becoming constant companions. `Abdu'l-Bahá was particularly close to both, and his mother took active participation in his education and upbringing. During the two-year absence of his father `Abdu'l-Bahá took up the duty of managing the affairs of the family, before his age of maturity (14 in middle-eastern society) and was known to be occupied with reading and, at a time of hand-copied scriptures being the primary means of publishing, was also engaged in copying the writings of the Báb. `Abdu’l-Bahá also took an interest in the art of horse riding and, as he grew, became a renowned rider.\n\nIn 1856, news of an ascetic carrying on discourses with local Súfí leaders that seemed to possibly be Bahá'u'lláh reached the family and friends. Immediately, family members and friends went to search for the elusive dervish – and in March brought Bahá'u'lláh back to Baghdad. On seeing his father, `Abdu'l-Bahá fell to his knees and wept loudly \"Why did you leave us?\", and this followed with his mother and sister doing the same. `Abdu'l-Bahá soon became his father's secretary and shield. During the sojourn in the city `Abdu’l-Bahá grew from a boy into a young man. He was noted as a \"remarkably fine looking youth\", and remembered for his charity and amiableness. Having passed the age of maturity `Abdu'l-Bahá was regularly seen in the mosques of Baghdad discussing religious topics and the scripture as a young man. Whilst in Baghdad, `Abdu'l-Bahá composed a commentary at the request of his father on the Muslim tradition of \"I was a Hidden Treasure\" for a Súfí leader named `Alí Shawkat Páshá. `Abdu'l-Bahá was fifteen or sixteen at the time and `Alí Shawkat Páshá regarded the more than 11000 word essay as a remarkable feat for somebody of his age. In 1863 in what became known as the Garden of Ridván Bahá'u'lláh announced to a few that he was the manifestation of God and He whom God shall make manifest whose coming had been foretold by the Báb. On day eight of the twelve days, it is believed `Abdu'l-Baha was the first person Baha'u'llah revealed his claim to.\n\nIn 1863 Bahá'u'lláh was summoned to Constantinople (Istanbul), and thus his whole family including `Abdu'l-Bahá, then nineteen, accompanied him on his 110-day journey. The journey to Constantinople was another wearisome journey, and `Abdu'l-Bahá helped feed the exiles. It was here that his position became more prominent amongst the Bahá’ís. This was further solidified by Bahá’u’lláh’s tablet of the Branch in which he constantly exalts his son's virtues and station. The family were soon exiled to Adrianople and `Abdu'l-Bahá went with the family. `Abdu’l-Bahá again suffered from frostbite.\n\nIn Adrianople `Abdu’l-Bahá was regarded as the sole comforter of his family – in particular to his mother. At this point `Abdu'l-Bahá was known by the Bahá'ís as \"the Master\", and by non-Bahá'ís as `Abbás Effendi (\"Effendi\" signifies \"Sir\"). It was in Adrianople that Bahá’u’lláh referred to his son as \"the Mystery of God\". The title of \"Mystery of God\" symbolises, according to Bahá'ís, that `Abdu'l-Bahá is not a manifestation of God but how a \"person of `Abdu'l-Bahá the incompatible characteristics of a human nature and superhuman knowledge and perfection have been blended and are completely harmonized\". `Abdu'l-Bahá was at this point noted for having black hair which flowed to his shoulders, large blue eyes, rose-through-alabaster coloured skin and a fine nose. Bahá'u'lláh gave his son many other titles such as \"Ghusn-i-A'zam\" (meaning \"Mightiest Branch\" or \"Mightier Branch\"), the \"Branch of Holiness\", \"the Center of the Covenant\" and the apple of his eye. `Abdu'l-Bahá (\"the Master\") was devastated when hearing the news that he and his family were to be exiled separately from Bahá'u'lláh. It was, according to Bahá'ís, through his intercession that the idea was reverted and the family were allowed to be exiled together.\n\nAt the age of 24, `Abdu'l-Bahá was clearly chief-steward to his father and an outstanding member of the Bahá’í community. Bahá’u’lláh and his family were – in 1868 – exiled to the penal colony of Acre, Palestine where it was expected that the family would perish. Arrival in Acre was distressing for the family and exiles. They were greeted in a hostile manner by the surrounding population and his sister and father fell dangerously ill. When told that the women were to sit on the shoulders of the men to reach the shore, `Abdu'l-Bahá took a chair and carried the women to the bay of Acre. `Abdu'l-Bahá was able to procure some anesthetic and nursed the sick. The Bahá’ís were imprisoned under horrendous conditions in a cluster of cells covered in excrement and dirt. `Abdu'l-Bahá himself fell dangerously ill with dysentery, however a sympathetic soldier permitted a physician to help cure him. The population shunned them, the soldiers treated them the same, and the behaviour of Siyyid Muhammad-i-Isfahani (an Azali) did not help matters. Morale was further destroyed with the accidental death of `Abdu'l-Bahá’s youngest brother Mírzá Mihdí at the age of 22. His death devastated the family – particularly his mother and father – and the grieving `Abdu'l-Bahá kept a night-long vigil beside his brother’s body.\n\nOver time, he gradually took over responsibility for the relationships between the small Bahá'i exile community and the outside world. It was through his interaction with the people of Acre that, according to the Bahá'ís, they recognized the innocence of the Bahá'ís, and thus the conditions of imprisonment were eased. Four months after the death of Mihdí the family moved from the prison to the House of `Abbúd. The people of Acre started to respect the Bahá'ís and in particular, `Abdu'l-Bahá. `Abdu'l-Bahá was able to arrange for houses to be rented for the family, the family later moved to the Mansion of Bahjí around 1879 when an epidemic caused the inhabitants to flee.\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá soon became very popular in the penal colony and Myron Henry Phelps a wealthy New York lawyer described how \"a crowd of human beings...Syrians, Arabs, Ethiopians, and many others\", all waited to talk and receive `Abdu'l-Bahá. He undertook a history of the Bábí religion through publication of A Traveller's Narrative (Makála-i-Shakhsí Sayyáh) in 1886, later translated and published in translation in 1891 through Cambridge University by the agency of Edward Granville Browne who described `Abdu'l-Bahá as: \n\nAs a young man speculation was rife amongst the Bahá’ís to whom `Abdu'l-Bahá would marry. Several young girls were seen as marriage prospects but `Abdu’l-Bahá seemed disinclined to marriage. On 8 March 1873, at the urging of his father, the twenty-eight-year-old `Abdu’l-Bahá married Fátimih Nahrí of Isfahán (1847–1938) a twenty-five-year-old from an upper-class family of the city. Her father was Mírzá Muḥammad `Alí Nahrí of Isfahan an eminent Bahá’í with prominent connections. Fátimih was brought from Persia to Acre, Palestine after both Bahá’u’lláh and his wife Navváb expressed an interest in her to marry `Abdu’l-Bahá. After a wearisome journey from Isfahán to Akka she finally arrived accompanied by her brother in 1872. The young couple were betrothed for about five months before the marriage itself commenced. In the meantime, Fátimih lived in the home of `Abdu'l-Bahá’s uncle Mírzá Músá. According to her later memoirs, Fátimih fell in love with `Abdu'l-Bahá on seeing him. `Abdu'l-Bahá himself had showed little inkling to marriage until meeting Fátimih; who was entitled Munírih by Bahá’u’lláh. Munírih is a title meaning \"Luminous\".\n\nThe marriage resulted in nine children. The first born was a son Mihdí Effendi who died aged about 3. He was followed by Ḍiyá'iyyih Khánum, Fu’ádíyyih Khánum (d. few years old), Rúhangíz Khánum (d. 1893), Túbá Khánum, Husayn Effendi (d.1887 aged 5), Túbá Khánum, Rúhá Khánum and Munnavar Khánum. The death of his children caused `Abdu’l-Bahá immense grief – in particular the death of his son Husayn Effendi came at a difficult time following the death of his mother and uncle. The surviving children (all daughters) were; Ḍiyá'iyyih Khánum (mother of Shoghi Effendi) (d. 1951) Túbá Khánum (1880–1959) Rúḥá Khánum and Munavvar Khánum (d. 1971). Bahá'u'lláh wished that the Bahá'ís follow the example of `Abdu'l-Bahá and gradually move away from polygamy. The marriage of `Abdu’l-Bahá to one woman and his choice to remain monogamous, from advice of his father and his own wish, legitimised the practice of monogamy to a people whom hitherto had regarded polygamy as a righteous way of life.\n\nAfter Bahá'u'lláh died on 29 May 1892, the Will and Testament of Bahá'u'lláh named `Abdu'l-Bahá as Centre of the Covenant, successor and interpreter of Bahá'u'lláh's writings. In the Will and Testament `Abdu'l-Bahá's half-brother, Muhammad `Alí, was mentioned by name as being subordinate to `Abdu'l-Bahá. Muhammad `Alí became jealous of his half-brother and set out to establish authority for himself as an alternative leader with the support of his brothers Badi'u'llah and Diya'u'llah. He began correspondence with Bahá'ís in Iran, initially in secret, casting doubts in others' minds about `Abdu'l-Bahá. While most Bahá'ís followed `Abdu'l-Bahá, a handful followed Muhammad `Alí including such leaders as Mirza Javad and Ibrahim George Kheiralla, an early Bahá'í missionary to America.\n\nMuhammad `Alí and Mirza Javad began to openly accuse `Abdu'l-Bahá of taking on too much authority, suggesting that he believed himself to be a Manifestation of God, equal in status to Bahá'u'lláh. It was at this time that `Abdu'l-Bahá, in order to provide proof of the falsity of the accusations leveled against him, in tablets to the West, stated that he was to be known as \"`Abdu'l-Bahá\" an Arabic phrase meaning the Servant of Bahá to make it clear that he was not a Manifestation of God, and that his station was only servitude. `Abdu'l-Bahá left a Will and Testament that set up the framework of administration. The two highest institutions were the Universal House of Justice, and the Guardianship, for which he appointed Shoghi Effendi as the Guardian. With the exception of `Abdu'l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, Muhammad `Alí was supported by all of the remaining male relatives of Bahá'u'lláh, including Shoghi Effendi's father, Mírzá Hádí Shírází. However Muhammad `Alí's and his families statements had very little effect on the Bahá'ís in general - in the `Akká area, the followers of Muhammad `Alí represented six families at most, they had no common religious activities, and were almost wholly assimilated into Muslim society.\n\nBy the end of 1898, Western pilgrims started coming to Akka on pilgrimage to visit `Abdu'l-Bahá; this group of pilgrims, including Phoebe Hearst, was the first time that Bahá'ís raised up in the West had met `Abdu'l-Bahá. The first group arrived in 1898 and throughout late 1898 to early 1899 Western Bahá’ís sporadically visited `Abdu'l-Bahá. The group was relatively young containing mainly women from high American society in their 20s. The group of Westerners aroused suspicion for the authorities, and consequently `Abdu'l-Bahá’s confinement was tightened. During the next decade `Abdu'l-Bahá would be in constant communication with Bahá'ís around the world, helping them to teach the religion; the group included May Ellis Bolles in Paris, Englishman Thomas Breakwell, American Herbert Hopper, French , Susan Moody, Lua Getsinger, and American Laura Clifford Barney. It was Laura Clifford Barney who, by asking questions of `Abdu'l-Bahá over many years and many visits to Haifa, compiled what later became the book Some Answered Questions.\n\nDuring the final years of the 19th century, while `Abdu'l-Bahá was still officially a prisoner and confined to `Akka, he organized the transfer of the remains of the Báb from Iran to Palestine. He then organized the purchase of land on Mount Carmel that Bahá'u'lláh had instructed should be used to lay the remains of the Báb, and organized for the construction of the Shrine of the Báb. This process took another 10 years. With the increase of pilgrims visiting `Abdu'l-Bahá, Muhammad `Alí worked with the Ottoman authorities to re-introduce stricter terms on `Abdu'l-Bahá's imprisonment in August 1901. By 1902, however, due to the Governor of `Akka being supportive of `Abdu'l-Bahá, the situation was greatly eased; while pilgrims were able to once again visit `Abdu'l-Bahá, he was confined to the city. In February 1903, two followers of Muhammad `Alí, including Badi'u'llah and Siyyid `Aliy-i-Afnan, broke with Muhammad `Ali and wrote books and letters giving details of Muhammad `Ali's plots and noting that what was circulating about `Abdu'l-Bahá was fabrication.\n\nFrom 1902 to 1904, in addition to the building of the Shrine of the Báb that `Abdu'l-Bahá was directing, he started to put into execution two different projects; the restoration of the House of the Báb in Shiraz, Iran and the construction of the first Bahá'í House of Worship in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. `Abdu'l-Bahá asked Aqa Mirza Aqa to coordinate the work so that the house of the Báb would be restored to the state that it was at the time of the Báb's declaration to Mulla Husayn in 1844; he also entrusted the work on the House of Worship to Vakil-u'd-Dawlih.\n\nDuring this period, `Abdu'l-Bahá communicated with a number Young Turks, opposed to the reign of Sultan Abdul Hamid II, including Namık Kemal, Ziya Pasha and Midhat Pasha, in an attempt to disseminate Bahá'í thought into their political ideology. He emphasized Bahá'ís \"seek freedom and love liberty, hope for equality, are well-wishers of humanity and ready to sacrifice their lives to unite humanity\" but on a more broad approach than the Young Turks. Abdullah Cevdet, one of the founders of the Committee of Union and Progress who considered the Bahá'í Faith an intermediary step between Islam and the ultimate abandonment of religious belief, would go on trial for defense of Bahá'ís in a periodical he founded.\n\n‛Abdu'l-Bahá also had contact with military leaders as well, including such individuals as Bursalı Mehmet Tahir Bey and Hasan Bedreddin. The latter, who was involved in the overthrow of Sultan Abdülaziz, is commonly known as Bedri Paşa or Bedri Pasha and is referred to in Persian Bahá'í sources as Bedri Bey (Badri Beg). He was a Bahá'í who translated ‛Abdu’l-Baha's works into French.\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá also met Muhammad Abduh, one of the key figures of Islamic Modernism and the Salafi movement, in Beirut, at a time when the two men were both opposed to the Ottoman \"ulama\" and shared similar goals of religious reform. Rashid Rida asserts that during his visits to Beirut, `Abdu'l-Bahá would attend Abduh's study sessions. Regarding the meetings of `Abdu'l-Bahá and Muhammad 'Abduh, Shoghi Effendi asserts that \"His several interviews with the well-known Shaykh Muhammad ‘Abdu served to enhance immensely the growing prestige of the community and spread abroad the fame of its most distinguished member.\"\n\nDue to `Abdu'l-Bahá's political activities and alleged accusation against him by Muhammad `Ali, a Commission of Inquiry interviewed `Abdu'l-Bahá in 1905, with the result that he was almost exiled to Fezzan. In response, `Abdu'l-Bahá wrote the sultan a letter protesting that his followers refrain from involvement in partisan politics and that his \"tariqa\" had guided many Americans to Islam. The next few years in `Akka were relatively free of pressures and pilgrims were able to come and visit `Abdu'l-Bahá. By 1909 the mausoleum of the Shrine of the Báb was completed.\n\nThe 1908 Young Turks revolution freed all political prisoners in the Ottoman Empire, and `Abdu'l-Bahá was freed from imprisonment. His first action after his freedom was to visit the Shrine of Bahá'u'lláh in Bahji. While `Abdu'l-Bahá continued to live in `Akka immediately following the revolution, he soon moved to live in Haifa near the Shrine of the Báb. In 1910, with the freedom to leave the country, he embarked on a three-year journey to Egypt, Europe, and North America, spreading the Bahá'í message.\n\nFrom August to December 1911, `Abdu'l-Bahá visited cities in Europe, including London, Bristol, and Paris. The purpose of these trips was to support the Bahá'í communities in the west and to further spread his father's teachings.\n\nIn the following year, he undertook a much more extensive journey to the United States and Canada to once again spread his father's teachings. He arrived in New York City on 11 April 1912, after declining an offer of passage on the RMS Titanic, telling the Bahá'í believers, instead, to \"Donate this to charity.\" He instead travelled on a slower craft, the S.S. Cedric, and cited preference of a longer sea journey as the reason. After hearing of the Titanic's sinking on 16 April he was quoted as saying \"I was asked to sail upon the Titanic, but my heart did not prompt me to do so.\" While he spent most of his time in New York, he visited Chicago, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Washington, D.C., Boston and Philadelphia. In August of the same year he started a more extensive journey to places including New Hampshire, the Green Acre school in Maine, and Montreal (his only visit to Canada). He then travelled west to Minneapolis, San Francisco, Stanford, and Los Angeles before starting to return east at the end of October. On 5 December 1912 he set sail back to Europe.\n\nDuring his visit to North America he visited many missions, churches, and groups, as well as having scores of meetings in Bahá'ís' homes, and offering innumerable personal meetings with hundreds of people. During his talks he proclaimed Bahá'í principles such as the unity of God, unity of the religions, oneness of humanity, equality of women and men, world peace and economic justice. He also insisted that all his meetings be open to all races.\n\nHis visit and talks were the subject of hundreds of newspaper articles. In Boston newspaper reporters asked `Abdu'l-Bahá why he had come to America, and he stated that he had come to participate in conferences on peace and that just giving warning messages is not enough. `Abdu'l-Bahá's visit to Montreal provided notable newspaper coverage; on the night of his arrival the editor of the \"Montreal Daily Star\" met with him and that newspaper along with The Montreal Gazette, \"Montreal Standard\", Le Devoir and La Presse among others reported on `Abdu'l-Bahá's activities. The headlines in those papers included \"Persian Teacher to Preach Peace\", \"Racialism Wrong, Says Eastern Sage, Strife and War Caused by Religious and National Prejudices\", and \"Apostle of Peace Meets Socialists, Abdul Baha's Novel Scheme for Distribution of Surplus Wealth.\" The \"Montreal Standard\", which was distributed across Canada, took so much interest that it republished the articles a week later; the Gazette published six articles and Montreal's largest French language newspaper published two articles about him. His 1912 visit to Montreal also inspired humourist Stephen Leacock to parody him in his bestselling 1914 book \"Arcadian Adventures with the Idle Rich\". In Chicago one newspaper headline included \"His Holiness Visits Us, Not Pius X but A. Baha,\" and `Abdu'l-Bahá's visit to California was reported in the \"Palo Altan\".\n\nBack in Europe, he visited London, Paris (where he stayed for two months), Stuttgart, Budapest, and Vienna. Finally, on June 12, 1913, he returned to Egypt, where he stayed for six months before returning to Haifa.\n\nDuring World War I `Abdu'l-Bahá stayed in Palestine, under the continued threat of Allied bombardment and threats from the Turkish commander. As the war ended, the British Mandate over Palestine brought relative security to `Abdu'l-Bahá. During his final year, a growing number of visitors and pilgrims came to see him in Haifa.\n\nAccording to Harry Charles Luke, an official in the British Colonial Office who served as assistant Governor of Jerusalem, `Abdu'l-Bahá \"was created by King George V a K.B.E.\" on December 4, 1919, being conferred his knighthood \"for valuable services rendered to the British Government in the early days of the Occupation.\" This has been judged to be humanitarian service to people following the privations of war and the chaos in its immediate aftermath by averting a famine in Northern Palestine. He was ceremonially knighted on April 27, 1920, an event which was prominently reported in the \"Star of the West\" as \" a most wonderful celebration.\"\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá praised the Zionist movement and encouraged the Zionists to \"mingle with other races and live in unity with them\" under a neutral government like the British administration following World War I. He had earlier declared that the prophecies of the Old Testament would be fulfilled and that \"the Israelites will all gather in the Holy Land\".\n\n`Abdu'l-Bahá died on November 28, 1921 (27th of Rabi'u'l-Avval, 1340 AH.) at about 1:00 AM. The news of the death was however kept a secret from a number of his relatives, such as his half-brother Mírzá Muhammad `Alí, whom he had himself declared Covenant-breakers and were thus denied participation in the funeral. On his funeral, Esslemont notes:\n\nHe is buried in the front room of the Shrine of the Báb on Mount Carmel. Plans are in place to one day build a Shrine of `Abdu'l-Bahá. In his Will and Testament he appointed his grandson Shoghi Effendi Rabbani as the Guardian of the Bahá'í Faith.\n\nThe total estimated number of tablets that `Abdu'l-Bahá wrote are over 27,000, of which only a fraction have been translated into English. His works fall into two groups including first his direct writings and second his lectures and speeches as noted by others. The first group includes \"The Secret of Divine Civilization\" written before 1875, \"A Traveller's Narrative\" written around 1886, the Resāla-ye sīāsīya or \"Sermon on the Art of Governance\" written in 1893, the \"Memorials of the Faithful\", and a large number of tablets written to various people; including various Western intellectuals such as August Forel which has been translated and published as the Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel. The \"Secret of Divine Civilization\" and the \"Sermon on the Art of Governance\" were widely circulated anonymously.\n\nThe second group includes Some Answered Questions, which is an English translation of a series of table talks with Laura Barney, and Paris Talks, \"`Abdu'l-Baha in London\" and \"Promulgation of Universal Peace\" which are respectively addresses given by `Abdu'l-Bahá in Paris, London and the United States.\n\nThe following is a list of some of `Abdu'l-Bahá's many books, tablets, and talks:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3020", "title": "Ambrose of Alexandria", "text": "Ambrose of Alexandria\n\nAmbrose of Alexandria (before 212 – c. 250) was a friend of the Christian theologian Origen. Ambrose was attracted by Origen's fame as a teacher, and visited the Catechetical School of Alexandria in 212. At first a gnostic Valentinian and Marcionist, Ambrose, through Origen's teaching, eventually rejected this theology and became Origen's constant companion, and was ordained deacon. He plied Origen with questions, and urged him to write his Commentaries () on the books of the Bible, and, as a wealthy nobleman and courtier, he provided his teacher with books for his studies and secretaries to lighten the labor of composition.\n\nHe suffered during the persecution under the Roman emperor Maximinus Thrax in 235. He was later released and died a confessor. The last mention of Ambrose in the historical record is in Origen's \"Contra Celsum,\" which the latter wrote at the solicitation of Ambrose.\n\nOrigen often speaks of Ambrose in affectionately as a man of education with excellent literary and scholarly tastes. All of Origen's works written after 218 are dedicated to Ambrose, including his \"On Martyrdom\", \"Contra Celsum\", \"Commentary on St. John's Gospel\", and \"On Prayer\". Ambrose's letters to Origen (praised by Jerome) are lost, although part of one exists.\n\nAmbrose is venerated as a saint by some branches of Christianity. His feast day in the Roman Catholic Church falls on 17 March.\n"}
{"id": "3022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3022", "title": "Autonomous building", "text": "Autonomous building\n\nAn autonomous building is a building designed to be operated independently from infrastructural support services such as the electric power grid, gas grid, municipal water systems, sewage treatment systems, storm drains, communication services, and in some cases, public roads.\n\nAdvocates of autonomous building describe advantages that include reduced environmental impacts, increased security, and lower costs of ownership. Some cited advantages satisfy tenets of green building, not independence per se (see below). Off-grid buildings often rely very little on civil services and are therefore safer and more comfortable during civil disaster or military attacks. (Off-grid buildings would not lose power or water if public supplies were compromised for some reason.)\n\nMost of the research and published articles concerning autonomous building focus on residential homes.\n\nBritish architects Brenda and Robert Vale have said that, as of 2002, \"It is quite possible in all parts of Australia to construct a 'house with no bills', which would be comfortable without heating and cooling, which would make its own electricity, collect its own water and deal with its own waste...These houses can be built now, using off-the-shelf techniques. It is possible to build a \"house with no bills\" for the same price as a conventional house, but it would be (25%) smaller.\"\n\nIn the 1970s, a group of activists and engineers calling themselves the New Alchemists believed the warnings of imminent resource depletion and starvation. The New Alchemists were famous for the depth of research effort placed in their projects. Using conventional construction techniques, they designed a series of \"bioshelter\" projects, the most famous of which was the Ark Bioshelter community for Prince Edward Island. They published the plans for all of these, with detailed design calculations and blueprints. The Ark used wind based water pumping and electricity, and was self-contained in food production. It had living quarters for people, fish tanks raising tilapia for protein, a greenhouse watered with fish water and a closed loop sewage reclamation system that recycled human waste into sanitized fertilizer for the fish tanks. As of January 2010, the successor organization to the New Alchemists has a web page up as the \"New Alchemy Institute\". The PEI Ark has been abandoned and partially renovated several times.\n\nThe 1990s saw the development of Earthships, similar in intent to the Ark project, but organized as a for-profit venture, with construction details published in a series of 3 books by Mike Reynolds. The building material is tires filled with earth. This makes a wall that has large amounts of thermal mass (see earth sheltering). Berms are placed on exposed surfaces to further increase the house's temperature stability. The water system starts with rain water, processed for drinking, then washing, then plant watering, then toilet flushing, and finally black water is recycled again for more plant watering. The cisterns are placed and used as thermal masses. Power, including electricity, heat and water heating, is from solar power.\n\n1990s architects such as William McDonough and Ken Yeang applied environmentally responsible building design to large commercial buildings, such as office buildings, making them largely self-sufficient in energy production. One major bank building (ING's Amsterdam headquarters) in the Netherlands was constructed to be autonomous and artistic as well.\n\nAs an architect or engineer becomes more concerned with the disadvantages of transportation networks, and dependence on distant resources, their designs tend to include more autonomous elements. The historic path to autonomy was a concern for secure sources of heat, power, water and food. A nearly parallel path toward autonomy has been to start with a concern for environmental impacts, which cause disadvantages.\n\nAutonomous buildings can increase security and reduce environmental impacts by using on-site resources (such as sunlight and rain) that would otherwise be wasted. Autonomy often dramatically reduces the costs and impacts of networks that serve the building, because autonomy short-circuits the multiplying inefficiencies of collecting and transporting resources. Other impacted resources, such as oil reserves and the retention of the local watershed, can often be cheaply conserved by thoughtful designs.\n\nAutonomous buildings are usually energy-efficient in operation, and therefore cost-efficient, for the obvious reason that smaller energy needs are easier to satisfy off-grid. But they may substitute energy production or other techniques to avoid diminishing returns in extreme conservation.\n\nAn autonomous structure is not always environmentally friendly. The goal of independence from support systems is associated with, but not identical to, other goals of environmentally responsible green building. However, autonomous buildings also usually include some degree of sustainability through the use of renewable energy and other renewable resources, producing no more greenhouse gases than they consume, and other measures.\n\nFirst and fundamentally, independence is a matter of degree. Self sustainable living, for example, is eliminating dependence on the electrical grid is in fact relatively simple however, obtaining an efficient and reliable food source is a more demanding and time-consuming proposition.\n\nLiving within an autonomous shelter may also require that party to make sacrifices with lifestyle choices, personal behavior, and social expectations to name a few. Even the most comfortable and technologically advanced autonomous homes could require some alterations upon the residents psychological behavior(s); while others may adjust easily, others may not. Others describe their experience as inconvenient, irritating, isolating, or even as an unwanted full-time job. A well-designed building can reduce this issue, but usually at the expense of reduced autonomy.\n\nAn autonomous house must be custom-built (or extensively retrofitted) to suit the climate and location. Passive solar techniques, alternative toilet and sewage systems, thermal massing designs, basement battery systems, efficient windowing, and the array of other design tactics require some degree of non-standard construction, added expense, ongoing experimentation and maintenance, and also have an effect on the psychology of the space.\n\nThe Vales, among others, have shown that living off-grid can be a practical, logical lifestyle choice—under certain conditions.\n\nThis section includes some minimal descriptions of methods, to give some feel for such a building's practicality, provide indexes to further information, and give a sense of modern trends.\n\nThere are many methods of collecting and conserving water. Use reduction is cost-effective.\n\nGreywater systems reuse drained wash water to flush toilets or to water lawns and gardens. Greywater systems can halve the water use of most residential buildings; however, they require the purchase of a sump, greywater pressurization pump, and secondary plumbing. Some builders are installing waterless urinals and even composting toilets that completely eliminate water usage in sewage disposal.\n\nThe classic solution with minimal life-style changes is using a well. Once drilled, a well-foot requires substantial power. However, advanced well-foots can reduce power usage by twofold or more from older models. Well water can be contaminated in some areas. The sono arsenic filter eliminates unhealthy arsenic in well water.\n\nHowever drilling a well is an uncertain activity, with aquifers depleted in some areas. It can also be expensive.\n\nIn regions with sufficient rainfall, it is often more economical to design a building to use rain, with supplementary water deliveries in a drought. Rain water makes excellent soft washwater, but needs antibacterial treatment. If used for drinking, mineral supplements or mineralization is necessary.\n\nMost desert and temperate climates get at least of rain per year. This means that a typical one-story house with a greywater system can supply its year-round water needs from its roof alone. In the driest areas, it might require a cistern of . Many areas average of rain per week, and these can use a cistern as small as .\n\nIn many areas, it is difficult to keep a roof clean enough for drinking. To reduce dirt and bad tastes, systems use a metal collecting-roof and a \"roof cleaner\" tank that diverts the first 40 liters. Cistern water is usually chlorinated, though reverse osmosis systems provide even better quality drinking water.\n\nModern cisterns are usually large plastic tanks. Gravity tanks on short towers are reliable, so pump repairs are less urgent. The least expensive bulk cistern is a fenced pond or pool at ground level.\n\nReducing autonomy reduces the size and expense of cisterns. Many autonomous homes can reduce water use below per person per day, so that in a drought a month of water can be delivered inexpensively via truck. Self-delivery is often possible by installing fabric water tanks that fit the bed of a pick-up truck.\n\nIt can be convenient to use the cistern as a heat sink or trap for a heat pump or air conditioning system; however this can make cold drinking water warm, and in drier years may decrease the efficiency of the HVAC system.\n\nSolar stills can efficiently produce drinking water from ditch water or cistern water, especially high-efficiency multiple effect humidification designs, which separate the evaporator(s) and condenser(s).\n\nNew technologies, like reverse osmosis can create unlimited amounts of pure water from polluted water, ocean water, and even from humid air. Water makers are available for yachts that convert seawater and electricity into potable water and brine. Atmospheric water generators extract moisture from dry desert air and filter it to pure water.\n\nComposting toilets use bacteria to decompose human feces into useful, odourless, sanitary compost. The process is sanitary because soil bacteria eat the human pathogens as well as most of the mass of the waste. Nevertheless, most health authorities forbid direct use of \"humanure\" for growing food. The risk is microbial and viral contamination. In a dry composting toilet, the waste is evaporated or digested to gas (mostly carbon dioxide) and vented, so a toilet produces only a few pounds of compost every six months. To control the odor, modern toilets use a small fan to keep the toilet under negative pressure, and exhaust the gasses to a vent pipe.\n\nSome home sewage treatment systems use biological treatment, usually beds of plants and aquaria, that absorb nutrients and bacteria and convert greywater and sewage to clear water. This odor- and color-free reclaimed water can be used to flush toilets and water outside plants. When tested, it approaches standards for potable water. In climates that freeze, the plants and aquaria need to be kept in a small greenhouse space. Good systems need about as much care as a large aquarium.\n\nElectric incinerating toilets turn excrement into a small amount of ash. They are cool to the touch, have no water and no pipes, and require an air vent in a wall. They are used in remote areas where use of septic tanks is limited, usually to reduce nutrient loads in lakes.\n\nNASA's bioreactor is an extremely advanced biological sewage system. It can turn sewage into air and water through microbial action. NASA plans to use it in the manned Mars mission.\n\nA big disadvantage of complex biological sewage treatment systems is that if the house is empty, the sewage system biota may starve to death.\n\nAnother method is NASA's urine-to-water distillation system.\n\nSewage handling is essential for public health. Many diseases are transmitted by poorly functioning sewage systems.\n\nThe standard system is a tiled leach field combined with a septic tank. The basic idea is to provide a small system with primary sewage treatment. Sludge settles to the bottom of the septic tank, is partially reduced by anaerobic digestion, and fluid is dispersed in the leach field. The leach field is usually under a yard growing grass. Septic tanks can operate entirely by gravity, and if well managed, are reasonably safe.\n\nSeptic tanks have to be pumped periodically by a vacuum truck to eliminate non reducing solids. Failure to pump a septic tank can cause overflow that damages the leach field, and contaminates ground water. Septic tanks may also require some lifestyle changes, such as not using garbage disposals, minimizing fluids flushed into the tank, and minimizing nondigestible solids flushed into the tank. For example, septic safe toilet paper is recommended.\n\nHowever, septic tanks remain popular because they permit standard plumbing fixtures, and require few or no lifestyle sacrifices.\n\nComposting or packaging toilets make it economical and sanitary to throw away sewage as part of the normal garbage collection service. They also reduce water use by half, and eliminate the difficulty and expense of septic tanks. However, they require the local landfill to use sanitary practices.\n\nIncinerator systems are quite practical. The ashes are biologically safe, and less than 1/10 the volume of the original waste, but like all incinerator waste, are usually classified as hazardous waste.\n\nSome of the oldest pre-system sewage types are pit toilets, latrines, and outhouses. These are still used in many developing countries.\n\nDrainage systems are a crucial compromise between human habitability and a secure, sustainable watershed. Paved areas and lawns or turf do not allow much precipitation to filter through the ground to recharge aquifers. They can cause flooding and damage in neighbourhoods, as the water flows over the surface towards a low point.\n\nTypically, elaborate, capital-intensive storm sewer networks are engineered to deal with stormwater. In some cities, such as the Victorian era London sewers or much of the old City of Toronto, the storm water system is combined with the sanitary sewer system. In the event of heavy precipitation, the load on the sewage treatment plant at the end of the pipe becomes too great to handle and raw sewage is dumped into holding tanks, and sometimes into surface water.\n\nAutonomous buildings can address precipitation in a number of ways:\n\nIf a water absorbing swale for each yard is combined with permeable concrete streets, storm drains can be omitted from the neighbourhood. This can save more than $800 per house (1970s) by eliminating storm drains. One way to use the savings is to purchase larger lots, which permits more amenities at the same cost. Permeable concrete is an established product in warm climates, and in development for freezing climates. In freezing climates, the elimination of storm drains can often still pay for enough land to construct swales (shallow water collecting ditches) or water impeding berms instead. This plan provides more land for homeowners and can offer more interesting topography for landscaping.\n\nA green roof captures precipitation and uses the water to grow plants. It can be built into a new building or used to replace an existing roof.\n\nSince electricity is an expensive utility, the first step towards conservation is to design a house and lifestyle to reduce demand. Fluorescent lights, laptop computers and gas-powered refrigerators save electricity, although gas-powered refrigerators are not very efficient. There are also superefficient electric refrigerators, such as those produced by the Sun Frost company, some of which use only about half as much electricity as a mass-market energy star-rated refrigerator.\n\nUsing a solar roof, solar cells can provide electric power. Solar roofs have the potential to be more cost-effective than retrofitted solar power, because buildings need roofs anyway. Modern solar cells last about 40 years, which makes them a reasonable investment in some areas. At a sufficient angle, solar cells are cleaned by run-off rain water and therefore have almost no life-style impact.\n\nHowever, there are some areas where there is not a sufficient amount of solar radiation to justify using solar power. A common alternative or supplement is using wind turbines. To generate power, the average autonomous house needs only one small wind generator, 5 metres or less in diameter. On a 30-metre (100 foot) tower, this turbine can provide enough power to supplement solar power on cloudy days. Commercially available wind turbines use sealed, one-moving-part AC generators and passive, self-feathering blades for years of operation without service.\n\nThe main advantage of wind power is that larger wind turbines have a lower per-watt cost than solar cells, provided there is wind. However, location is critical. Just as some locations lack sun for solar cells, there are many areas that lack sufficient wind to justify a turbine installation. In the Great Plains of the United States, a 10-metre (33 foot) turbine can supply enough energy to heat and cool a well-built all-electric house. Economic use in other areas requires research, and possibly a site-survey.\n\nDuring times of low demand, excess power can be stored in batteries for future use. However, batteries need to be replaced every few years. In many areas, battery expenses can be eliminated by attaching the building to the electric power grid and operating the power system with net metering. Utility permission is required, but such cooperative generation is legally mandated in some areas (for example, California).\n\nA grid-based building is less autonomous, but more economical and sustainable with fewer lifestyle sacrifices. In rural areas the grid's cost and impacts can be reduced by using single-wire earth return systems (for example, the MALT-system).\n\nIn areas that lack access to the grid, battery size can be reduced by including a generator to recharge the batteries during extended fogs or other low-power conditions. Auxiliary generators are usually run from propane, natural gas, or sometimes diesel. An hour of charging usually provides a day of operation. Modern residential chargers permit the user to set the charging times, so the generator is quiet at night. Some generators automatically test themselves once per week.\n\nRecent advances in passively stable magnetic bearings may someday permit inexpensive storage of power in a flywheel in a vacuum. Research groups like Canada's Ballard Power Systems are also working to develop a \"regenerative fuel cell\", a device that can generate hydrogen and oxygen when power is available, and combine these efficiently when power is needed.\n\nEarth batteries tap electric currents in the earth called telluric current. They can be installed anywhere in the ground. They provide only low voltages and current. They were used to power telegraphs in the 19th century. As appliance efficiencies increase, they may become practical.\n\nMicrobial fuel cells finally allow the generation of electricity from biomass. The plant can be chopped and converted as a whole, or it can be left alive so that waste saps from the plant can be converted by bacteria.\n\nMost autonomous buildings are designed to use insulation, thermal mass and passive solar heating and cooling. Examples of these are trombe walls and other technologies as skylights.\n\nPassive solar heating can heat most buildings in even the mild and chilly climates. In colder climates, extra construction costs can be as little as 15% more than new, conventional buildings. In warm climates, those having less than two weeks of frosty nights per year, there is no cost impact.\n\nThe basic requirement for passive solar heating is that the solar collectors must face the prevailing sunlight (south in the Northern Hemisphere, north in the Southern Hemisphere), and the building must incorporate thermal mass to keep it warm in the night.\n\nA recent, somewhat experimental solar heating system \"Annualized geo solar heating\" is practical even in regions that get little or no sunlight in winter. It uses the ground beneath a building for thermal mass. Precipitation can carry away the heat, so the ground is shielded with skirts of plastic insulation. The thermal mass of this system is sufficiently inexpensive and large that it can store enough summer heat to warm a building for the whole winter, and enough winter cold to cool the building in summer.\n\nIn annualized geo solar systems, the solar collector is often separate from (and hotter or colder than) the living space. The building may actually be constructed from insulation, for example, straw-bale construction. Some buildings have been aerodynamically designed so that convection via ducts and interior spaces eliminates any need for electric fans.\n\nA more modest \"daily solar\" design is very practical. For example, for about a 15% premium in building costs, the Passivhaus building codes in Europe use high performance insulating windows, R-30 insulation, HRV ventilation, and a small thermal mass. With modest changes in the building's position, modern krypton- or argon-insulated windows permit normal-looking windows to provide passive solar heat without compromising insulation or structural strength. If a small heater is available for the coldest nights, a slab or basement cistern can inexpensively provide the required thermal mass. Passivhaus building codes in particular bring unusually good interior air quality, because the buildings change the air several times per hour, passing it though a heat exchanger to keep heat inside.\n\nIn all systems, a small supplementary heater increases personal security and reduces lifestyle impacts for a small reduction of autonomy. The two most popular heaters for ultra-high-efficiency houses are a small heat pump, which also provides air conditioning, or a central hydronic (radiator) air heater with water recirculating from the water heater. Passivhaus designs usually integrate the heater with the ventilation system.\n\nEarth sheltering and windbreaks can also reduce the absolute amount of heat needed by a building. Several feet below the earth, temperature ranges from in North Dakota to , in Southern Florida. Wind breaks reduce the amount of heat carried away from a building.\n\nRounded, aerodynamic buildings also lose less heat.\n\nAn increasing number of commercial buildings use a combined cycle with cogeneration to provide heating, often water heating, from the output of a natural gas reciprocating engine, gas turbine or stirling electric generator.\n\nHouses designed to cope with interruptions in civil services generally incorporate a wood stove, or heat and power from diesel fuel or bottled gas, regardless of their other heating mechanisms.\n\nElectric heaters and electric stoves may provide pollution-free heat (depending on the power source), but use large amounts of electricity. If enough electricity is provided by solar panels, wind turbines, or other means, then electric heaters and stoves become a practical autonomous design.\n\nHot water heat recycling units recover heat from water drain lines. They increase a building's autonomy by decreasing the heat or fuel used to heat water. They are attractive because they have no lifestyle changes.\n\nCurrent practical, comfortable domestic water-heating systems combine a solar preheating system with a thermostatic gas-powered flow-through heater, so that the temperature of the water is consistent, and the amount is unlimited. This reduces life-style impacts at some cost in autonomy.\n\nSolar water heaters can save large amounts of fuel. Also, small changes in lifestyle, such as doing laundry, dishes and bathing on sunny days, can greatly increase their efficiency. Pure solar heaters are especially useful for laundries, swimming pools and external baths, because these can be scheduled for use on sunny days.\n\nThe basic trick in a solar water heating system is to use a well-insulated holding tank. Some systems are vacuum- insulated, acting something like large thermos bottles. The tank is filled with hot water on sunny days, and made available at all times. Unlike a conventional tank water heater, the tank is filled only when there is sunlight. Good storage makes a smaller, higher-technology collector feasible. Such collectors can use relatively exotic technologies, such as vacuum insulation, and reflective concentration of sunlight.\n\nCogeneration systems produce hot water from waste heat. They usually get the heat from the exhaust of a generator or fuel cell.\n\nHeat recycling, cogeneration and solar pre-heating can save 50-75% of the gas otherwise used. Also, some combinations provide redundant reliability by having several sources of heat.\nSome authorities advocate replacing bottled gas or natural gas with biogas. However, this is usually impractical unless live-stock are on-site. The wastes of a single family are usually insufficient to produce enough methane for anything more than small amounts of cooking.\n\nAnnualized geo solar buildings often have buried, sloped water-tight skirts of insulation that extend from the foundations, to prevent heat leakage between the earth used as thermal mass, and the surface.\n\nLess dramatic improvements are possible. Windows can be shaded in summer. Eaves can be overhung to provide the necessary shade. These also shade the walls of the house, reducing cooling costs.\n\nAnother trick is to cool the building's thermal mass at night, and then cool the building from the thermal mass during the day. It helps to be able to route cold air from a sky-facing radiator (perhaps an air heating solar collector with an alternate purpose) or evaporative cooler directly through the thermal mass. On clear nights, even in tropical areas, sky facing radiators can cool below freezing.\n\nIf a circular building is aerodynamically smooth, and cooler than the ground, it can be passively cooled by the \"dome effect.\" Many installations have reported that a reflective or light colored dome induces a local vertical heat driven vortex that sucks cooler overhead air downward into a dome if the dome is vented properly (a single overhead vent, and peripheral vents). Some people have reported a temperature differential as high as () between the inside of the dome and the outside. Buckminster Fuller discovered this effect with a simple house design adapted from a grain silo, and adapted his Dymaxion house and geodesic domes to use it.\n\nRefrigerators and air conditioners operating from the waste heat of a diesel engine exhaust, heater flue or solar collector are entering use. These use the same principles as a gas refrigerator. Normally, the heat from a flue powers an \"absorptive chiller\". The cold water or brine from the chiller is used to cool air or a refrigerated space.\n\nCogeneration is popular in new commercial buildings. In current cogeneration systems small gas turbines or stirling engines powered from natural gas produce electricity and their exhaust drives an absorptive chiller.\n\nA truck trailer refrigerator operating from the waste heat of a tractor's diesel exhaust was demonstrated by NRG Solutions, Inc. NRG developed a hydronic ammonia gas heat exchanger and vaporizer, the two essential new, not commercially available components of a waste heat driven refrigerator.\n\nA similar scheme (multiphase cooling) can be by a multistage evaporative cooler. The air is passed through a spray of salt solution to dehumidify it, then through a spray of water solution to cool it, then another salt solution to dehumidify it again. The brine has to be regenerated, and that can be done economically with a low temperature solar still. Multiphase evaporative coolers can lower the air's temperature by 50 °F (28 °C), and still control humidity. If the brine regenerator uses high heat, they also partially sterilise the air.\n\nIf enough electric power is available, cooling can be provided by conventional air conditioning using a heat pump.\n\nFood production has often been included in historic autonomous projects to provide security.\nSkilled, intensive gardening can support an adult from as little as 100 square meters of land per person,\npossibly requiring the use of organic farming and aeroponics. Some proven intensive, low-effort food-production systems include urban gardening (indoors and outdoors). Indoor cultivation may be set up using hydroponics, while outdoor cultivation may be done using permaculture, forest gardening, no-till farming, and do nothing farming.\n\nGreenhouses are also sometimes included. Sometimes they are also outfitted with irrigation systems or heat sink-systems which can respectively irrigate the plants or help to store energy from the sun and redistribute it at night (when the greenhouses starts to cool down).\n\n"}
{"id": "3027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3027", "title": "Anubis", "text": "Anubis\n\nAnubis ( or ; ) or Anpu is the Greek name of a god associated with mummification and the afterlife in ancient Egyptian religion, usually depicted as a canine or a man with a canine head. Archeologists identified the sacred animal of Anubis as an Egyptian canid, that at the time was called the golden jackal, but recent genetic testing has caused the Egyptian animal to be reclassified as the African golden wolf.\n\nLike many ancient Egyptian deities, Anubis assumed different roles in various contexts. Depicted as a protector of graves as early as the First Dynasty (c. 3100 – c. 2890 BC), Anubis was also an embalmer. By the Middle Kingdom (c. 2055 – 1650 BC) he was replaced by Osiris in his role as lord of the underworld. One of his prominent roles was as a god who ushered souls into the afterlife. He attended the weighing scale during the \"Weighing of the Heart,\" in which it was determined whether a soul would be allowed to enter the realm of the dead. Despite being one of the most ancient and \"one of the most frequently depicted and mentioned gods\" in the Egyptian pantheon, Anubis played almost no role in Egyptian myths.\n\nAnubis was depicted in black, a color that symbolized both rebirth and the discoloration of the corpse after embalming. Anubis is associated with Wepwawet (also called Upuaut), another Egyptian god portrayed with a dog's head or in canine form, but with grey or white fur. Historians assume that the two figures were eventually combined. Anubis' female counterpart is Anput. His daughter is the serpent goddess Kebechet.\n\n\"Anubis\" is a Greek rendering of this god's Egyptian name. In the Old Kingdom (c. 2686 BC – c. 2181 BC), the standard way of writing his name in hieroglyphs was composed of the sound ı͗npw followed by a \"jackal\" over a \"ḥtp\" sign:\ni-n:p-w-C6\nA new form with the \"jackal\" on a tall stand appeared in the late Old Kingdom and became common thereafter:\ni-n:p-w-E16\n\nAccording to the Akkadian transcription in the Amarna letters, Anubis' name (\"ı͗npw\") was vocalized in Egyptian as Anapa.\n\nIn Egypt's Early Dynastic period (c. 3100 – c. 2686 BC), Anubis was portrayed in full animal form, with a \"jackal\" head and body. A \"jackal\" god, probably Anubis, is depicted in stone inscriptions from the reigns of Hor-Aha, Djer, and other pharaohs of the First Dynasty. Since Predynastic Egypt, when the dead were buried in shallow graves, \"jackals\" had been strongly associated with cemeteries because they were scavengers which uncovered human bodies and ate their flesh. In the spirit of \"fighting like with like,\" a \"jackal\" was chosen to protect the dead, because \"a common problem (and cause of concern) must have been the digging up of bodies, shortly after burial, by jackals and other wild dogs which lived on the margins of the cultivation.\"\n\nThe oldest known textual mention of Anubis is in the Pyramid Texts of the Old Kingdom (c. 2686 – c. 2181 BC), where he is associated with the burial of the pharaoh.\n\nIn the Old Kingdom, Anubis was the most important god of the dead. He was replaced in that role by Osiris during the Middle Kingdom (2000–1700 BC). In the Roman era, which started in 30 BC, tomb paintings depict him holding the hand of deceased persons to guide them to Osiris.\n\nThe parentage of Anubis varied between myths, times and sources. In early mythology, he was portrayed as a son of Ra. In the Coffin Texts, which were written in the First Intermediate Period (c. 2181–2055 BC), Anubis is the son of either the cow goddess Hesat or the cat-headed Bastet. Another tradition depicted him as the son of his father Ra and mother Nephthys. The Greek Plutarch (c. 40–120 AD) stated that Anubis was the illegitimate son of Nephthys and Osiris, but that he was adopted by Osiris's wife Isis:\n\nGeorge Hart sees this story as an \"attempt to incorporate the independent deity Anubis into the Osirian pantheon.\" An Egyptian papyrus from the Roman period (30–380 AD) simply called Anubis the \"son of Isis.\"\n\nIn the Ptolemaic period (350–30 BC), when Egypt became a Hellenistic kingdom ruled by Greek pharaohs, Anubis was merged with the Greek god Hermes, becoming Hermanubis. The two gods were considered similar because they both guided souls to the afterlife. The center of this cult was in \"uten-ha\"/\"Sa-ka\"/ Cynopolis, a place whose Greek name means \"city of dogs.\" In Book XI of \"The Golden Ass\" by Apuleius, there is evidence that the worship of this god was continued in Rome through at least the 2nd century. Indeed, Hermanubis also appears in the alchemical and hermetical literature of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.\n\nAlthough the Greeks and Romans typically scorned Egypt's animal-headed gods as bizarre and primitive (Anubis was mockingly called \"Barker\" by the Greeks), Anubis was sometimes associated with Sirius in the heavens and Cerberus and Hades in the underworld. In his dialogues, Plato often has Socrates utter oaths \"by the dog\" (\"kai me ton kuna\"), \"by the dog of Egypt\", and \"by the dog, the god of the Egyptians\", both for emphasis and to appeal to Anubis as an arbiter of truth in the underworld.\n\nIn contrast to real wolves, Anubis was a protector of graves and cemeteries. Several epithets attached to his name in Egyptian texts and inscriptions referred to that role. \"Khenty-imentiu\", which means \"foremost of the westerners\" and later became the name of a different wolf god, alluded to his protecting function because the dead were usually buried on the west bank of the Nile. He took other names in connection with his funerary role, such as \"He who is upon his mountain\" (\"tepy-dju-ef\") – keeping guard over tombs from above – and \"Lord of the sacred land\" (\"neb-ta-djeser\"), which designates him as a god of the desert necropolis.\n\nThe Jumilhac papyrus recounts another tale where Anubis protected the body of Osiris from Set. Set attempted to attack the body of Osiris by transforming himself into a leopard. Anubis stopped and subdued Set, however, and he branded Set's skin with a hot iron rod. Anubis then flayed Set and wore his skin as a warning against evil-doers who would desecrate the tombs of the dead. Priests who attended to the dead wore leopard skin in order to commemorate Anubis' victory over Set. The legend of Anubis branding the hide of Set in leopard form was used to explain how the leopard got its spots.\n\nMost ancient tombs had prayers to Anubis carved on them.\n\nAs \"He who is in the place of embalming\" (\"imy-ut\"), Anubis was associated with mummification. He was also called \"He who presides over the god's pavilion\" (\"khanty-she-netjer\"), in which \"pavilion\" could refer either to the place where embalming was carried out or the pharaoh's burial chamber.\n\nIn the Osiris myth, Anubis helped Isis to embalm Osiris. Indeed, when the Osiris myth emerged, it was said that after Osiris had been killed by Set, Osiris's organs were given to Anubis as a gift. With this connection, Anubis became the patron god of embalmers; during the rites of mummification, illustrations from the \"Book of the Dead\" often show a wolf-mask-wearing priest supporting the upright mummy.\n\nBy the late pharaonic era (664–332 BC), Anubis was often depicted as guiding individuals across the threshold from the world of the living to the afterlife. Though a similar role was sometimes performed by the cow-headed Hathor, Anubis was more commonly chosen to fulfill that function. Greek writers from the Roman period of Egyptian history designated that role as that of \"psychopomp\", a Greek term meaning \"guide of souls\" that they used to refer to their own god Hermes, who also played that role in Greek religion. Funerary art from that period represents Anubis guiding either men or women dressed in Greek clothes into the presence of Osiris, who by then had long replaced Anubis as ruler of the underworld.\n\nOne of the roles of Anubis was as the \"Guardian of the Scales.\" The critical scene depicting the weighing of the heart, in the \"Book of the Dead\", shows Anubis performing a measurement that determined whether the person was worthy of entering the realm of the dead (the underworld, known as \"Duat\"). By weighing the heart of a deceased person against Ma'at (or \"truth\"), who was often represented as an ostrich feather, Anubis dictated the fate of souls. Souls heavier than a feather would be devoured by Ammit, and souls lighter than a feather would ascend to a heavenly existence.\n\nAnubis was one of the most frequently represented gods in ancient Egyptian art. In the early dynastic period, he was depicted in animal form, as a black wolf. Anubis's distinctive black color did not represent the coat of real wolves, but it had several symbolic meanings. First it represented \"the discolouration of the corpse after its treatment with natron and the smearing of the wrappings with a resinous substance during mummification\". Being the color of the fertile silt of the River Nile, to Egyptians black also symbolized fertility and the possibility of rebirth in the afterlife.\n\nLater in the Middle Kingdom Anubis was often portrayed as a wolf-headed human. An extremely rare depiction of him in fully human form was found in the tomb of Ramesses II in Abydos.\n\nAnubis is often depicted wearing a ribbon and holding a \"nekhakha\" \"flail\" in the crook of his arm. Another of Anubis's attributes was the Imiut fetish.\n\nIn funerary contexts, Anubis is shown either attending to a deceased person's mummy or sitting atop a tomb protecting it. New Kingdom tomb-seals also depict Anubis sitting atop the nine bows that symbolize his domination over the enemies of Egypt.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3029", "title": "Arthur Jensen", "text": "Arthur Jensen\n\nArthur Robert Jensen (August 24, 1923 – October 22, 2012) was a professor of educational psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Jensen was known for his work in psychometrics and differential psychology, which is concerned with how and why individuals differ behaviorally from one another.\n\nHe was a major proponent of the hereditarian position in the nature and nurture debate, the position that genetics play a significant role in behavioral traits, such as intelligence and personality. He was the author of over 400 scientific papers published in refereed journals and sat on the editorial boards of the scientific journals \"Intelligence\" and \"Personality and Individual Differences\".\n\nHe was rated as one of the 50 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century. He was also a controversial figure, largely for his conclusions regarding the causes of race-based differences in intelligence.\n\nJensen was born August 24, 1923, in San Diego, California, the son of Linda Mary (née Schachtmayer) and Arthur Alfred Jensen, who operated and owned a lumber and building materials company. His paternal grandparents were Danish immigrants and his mother was of half Polish Jewish and half German descent. He studied at University of California, Berkeley (B.A. 1945), San Diego State College (M.A., 1952) and Columbia University (Ph.D., 1956), and did his doctoral thesis with Percival Symonds on the Thematic Apperception Test: He published this work. From 1956 through 1958, he did postdoctoral research at the University of London, Institute of Psychiatry with Hans Eysenck.\n\nUpon returning to the United States, he became a researcher and professor at the University of California, Berkeley, where he focused on individual differences in learning, especially the influences of culture, development, and genetics on intelligence and learning. He received tenure at Berkeley in 1962 and was given his first sabbatical in 1964. He concentrated much of his work on the learning difficulties of culturally disadvantaged students. In 2003, he was awarded the Kistler Prize for original contributions to the understanding of the connection between the human genome and human society. In 2006, the International Society for Intelligence Research awarded Jensen its Lifetime Achievement Award.\n\nJensen has had a lifelong interest in classical music and was, early in his life, attracted by the idea of becoming a conductor himself. At 14, he conducted a band that won a nationwide contest held in San Francisco. Later, he conducted orchestras and attended a seminar given by Nikolai Sokoloff. Soon after graduating from Berkeley, he moved to New York, mainly to be near the conductor Arturo Toscanini. He was also deeply interested in the life and example of Gandhi, producing an unpublished book-length manuscript on his life. During Jensen's period in San Diego he spent time working as a social worker with the San Diego Department of Public Welfare.\n\nJensen's interest in learning differences directed him to the extensive testing of school children. The results led him to distinguish between two separate types of learning ability. \"Level I\", or associative learning, may be defined as retention of input and rote memorization of simple facts and skills. \"Level II\", or conceptual learning, is roughly equivalent to the ability to manipulate and transform inputs, that is, the ability to solve problems.\n\nLater, Jensen was an important advocate in the mainstream acceptance of the general factor of intelligence, a concept which was essentially synonymous with his \"Level II\" conceptual learning. The general factor, or \"g\", is an abstraction that stems from the observation that scores on all forms of cognitive tests correlate positively with one another.\n\nJensen claimed, on the basis of his research, that general cognitive ability is essentially an inherited trait, determined predominantly by genetic factors rather than by environmental conditions. He also contended that while associative learning, or memorizing ability, is equally distributed among the races, conceptual learning, or synthesizing ability, occurs with significantly greater frequency in whites than in non-whites.\n\nJensen's most controversial work, published in February 1969 in the \"Harvard Educational Review\", was titled \"How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?\" It concluded, among other things, that Head Start programs designed to boost African-American IQ scores had failed, and that this was likely never to be remedied, largely because, in Jensen's estimation, 80% of the variance in IQ in the population studied was the result of genetic factors and the remainder was due to environmental influences.\n\nThe work became one of—if not the most—cited papers in the history of psychological testing and intelligence research.\n\nAfter the paper was released, students and faculty staged large protests outside Jensen's U.C. Berkeley office. Jensen was denied reprints of his work by his publisher and was not permitted to reply in response to letters of criticism—both extremely unusual policies for their day.\nIn a later article, Jensen argued that his claims had been misunderstood:\n...nowhere have I \"claimed\" an \"innate deficiency\" of intelligence in blacks. My position on this question is clearly spelled out in my most recent book: \"The plain fact is that at present there exists no scientifically satisfactory explanation for the differences between the IQ distributions in the black and white populations. The only genuine consensus among well-informed scientists on this topic is that the cause of the difference remains an open question.\" (Jensen, 1981a, p. 213).\nAlthough a critic of Jensen's thesis, economist Thomas Sowell, criticizing the taboo against research on race and intelligence, wrote:\nProfessor Jensen pointed out back in 1969 that black children's IQ scores rose by 8 to 10 points after he met with them informally in a play room and then tested them again after they were more relaxed around him. He did this because \"I felt these children were really brighter than their IQ would indicate.\" What a shame that others seem to have less confidence in black children than Professor Jensen has had.\n\nHowever, Jensen's 1998 \"\" gives his position suggesting a genetic component is implicated in the white-black difference in IQ. In Chapter 12: Population Differences in \"g\": Causal Hypotheses, Jensen writes:\n\nThe relationship of the g factor to a number of biological variables and its relationship to the size of the white-black differences on various cognitive tests (i.e., Spearman's hypothesis) suggests that the average white-black difference in \"g\" has a biological component. Human races are viewed not as discrete, or Platonic, categories, but rather as breeding populations that, as a result of natural selection, have come to differ statistically in the relative frequencies of many polymorphic genes. The genetic distances between various populations form a continuous variable that can be measured in terms of differences in gene frequencies. Racial populations differ in many genetic characteristics, some of which, such as brain size, have behavioral and psychometric correlates, particularly \"g\".\nIn 1994 he was one of 52 signatories on \"Mainstream Science on Intelligence, \" an editorial written by Linda Gottfredson and published in the \"Wall Street Journal\", which declared the consensus of the signing scholars on the meaning and significance of IQ following the publication of the book \"The Bell Curve\".\n\nIn 2005, Jensen's article, co-written with J. Philippe Rushton, named \"Thirty Years of Research on Race Differences in Cognitive Ability\", was published in the APA journal \"Psychology, Public Policy and Law\". Jensen and Rushton present ten categories of evidence in support of the notion that IQ differences between whites and blacks are partly genetic in origin.\n\nHe died on October 22, 2012 at his home in Kelseyville, California at age 89.\n\nMelvin Konner wrote in the notes to his book \"The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit\":\n\nStatements made by Arthur Jensen, William Shockley, and other investigators in the late 1960s and early 1970s about race and IQ or social class and IQ rapidly passed into currency in policy discussions. Many of these statements were proved wrong, but they had already influenced some policymakers, and that influence is very difficult to recant.\nMany studies that purport to be both science-based and attempt to influence public policy have been accused of scientific racism. Konner wrote:\nWhat of the latest currents of thought? Are they likely to lead to, or at least encourage, further distortions of social policy? The indications are not all encouraging. Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray published a book in 1994 clearly directed at policy, just as Jensen and others had in the 1960s and 1970s. \"The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life\" (New York: Free Press 1994) teamed a psychologist with a conservative policy advocate to try to prove that both the class structure and the racial divide in the United States result from genetically determined differences in intelligence and ability.\n\nTheir general assertions about genes and IQ were not very controversial, but their speculations on race were something else again.\n\nBy 1994, the time of \"The Bell Curve\"'s publishing, Jensen had received $1.1 million from the Pioneer Fund,\nan organization frequently described as racist and \"white supremacist\" in nature.\nThe fund contributed a total of $3.5 million to researchers cited in The Bell Curve's most controversial chapter \"that suggests some races are naturally smarter than others\" with Jensen's works being cited twenty-three times in the book's bibliography.\n\nLisa Suzuki and Joshua Aronson of New York University claimed in 2005 that, unwaveringly for over 30 years, Jensen has largely ignored evidence that fails to support his position that IQ test score gaps represent a genetic racial hierarchy.\n\nPaleontologist and evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould attacked Jensen's work in his 1981 book \"The Mismeasure of Man\". Gould writes that Jensen misapplies the concept of \"heritability\", which is defined as a measure of the variation of a trait due to inheritance \"within\" a population (Gould 1981: 127; 156-157). According to Gould, Jensen uses heritability to measure differences \"between\" populations. Gould also disagrees with Jensen's belief that IQ tests measure a real variable, \"g\", or \"the general factor common to a large number of cognitive abilities\" which can be measured along a unilinear scale.\n\nThis is a claim most closely identified with Charles Spearman. According to Gould, Jensen misunderstood the research of L. L. Thurstone to ultimately support this claim; Gould, however, argues that Thurstone's factor analysis of intelligence revealed \"g\" to be an illusion (1981: 159; 13-314). Gould criticizes Jensen's sources including his use of Catharine Cox's 1926 \"Genetic Studies of Genius\", which examines historiometrically the IQs of historic intellectuals after their deaths (Gould 1981: 153-154).\n\nIn 1980 Jensen published a detailed book in defense of the tests used to measure mental abilities, entitled \"Bias in Mental Testing\". Reviewing this book, psychologist Kenneth Kaye endorsed Jensen's distinction between bias and discrimination. The purpose of tests is to discriminate (that is, reveal actual differences) on the basis of ability; bias constitutes error. Jensen defined any test as biased for a particular group if that group differs significantly from the majority group in the slopes, intercepts, or standard error of the estimates of their regression lines. Most studies found no difference in the regression lines between black and white groups, but those differences that had been found to be biased had overpredicted rather than underpredicted the minority group's performance (for example, grades in Officer Candidate courses). Jensen's conclusion:\nUntil we find out what the relevant psychological predictors are for which racial classification per se is merely a 'stand-in' variable, we have no choice but to include race (or other group membership) as a predictive variable along with the test scores or other predictive measures. On the other hand, if the overprediction of the minority group's criterion performance is not too extreme, it may seem reasonable to many to leave it uncorrected, thereby giving the benefit of the slight predictive bias to the presumably disadvantaged group.\nPointing out that \"many of Jensen's opponents allowed their scientific conclusions to be far more biased by their political views than he did, Kaye quoted 18th-century David Hume: \"There is no Method of Reasoning more Common, and yet none more blameable, than in philosophical Debates, to endeavor the Refutation of any Hypothesis, by a Pretext of its dangerous Consequences to Religion and Morality.\"\n\nIn a 1982 review of \"The Mismeasure of Man\", Jensen gives point-by-point rebuttals to much of Gould's critique, including Gould's treatment of heritability, the \"reification\" of \"g\", and the use of Thurstone's analysis.\n\nIn Arthur Jensen's response to Gould's criticisms, in the paper titled \"The Debunking of Scientific Fossils and Straw Persons\", Jensen begins his paper with this observation:\nStephen Jay Gould is a paleontologist at Harvard's Museum of Comparative Zoology and offers a course at Harvard entitled, \"Biology as a Social Weapon.\" Apparently the course covers much the same content as does the present book. Having had some personal cause for interest in ideologically motivated attacks on biologically oriented behavioral scientists, I first took notice of Gould when he played a prominent role in a group called Science for the People and in that group's attack on the theories of Harvard zoologist Edward O. Wilson, a leader in the development of sociobiology...\nWhile Jensen recognizes the validity of some of Gould's claims, in many places, he criticizes Gould's general approach:\nThis charge of a social, value-laden science undoubtedly contains an element of truth. In recent years, however, we recognize this charge as the keystone of the Marxist interpretation of the history of science.\nJensen adds that Gould made a number of misrepresentations, whether intentional or unintentional, while purporting to present Jensen's own positions:\nIn his references to my own work, Gould includes at least nine citations that involve more than just an expression of Gould's opinion; in these citations Gould purportedly paraphrases my views. Yet in eight of the nine cases, Gould's representation of these views is false, misleading, or grossly caricatured. Nonspecialists could have no way of knowing any of this without reading the cited sources. While an author can occasionally make an inadvertent mistake in paraphrasing another, it appears Gould's paraphrases are consistently slanted to serve his own message.\nJensen expressed considerably greater praise of his frequent intellectual sparring partner, James R. Flynn:\nNow and then I am asked by colleagues, students, and journalists: who, in my opinion, are the most respectable critics of my position on the race-IQ issue? The name James R. Flynn is by far the first that comes to mind. His book, \"Race, IQ and Jensen\" (1980), is a distinguished contribution to the literature on this topic, and, among the critiques I have seen of my position, is virtually in a class by itself for objectivity, thoroughness, and scholarly integrity.\n\n\"\" (1998) is a book on the general intelligence factor (\"g\"). The book deals with the intellectual history of g and various models of how to conceptualize intelligence, and with the biological correlates of g, its heritability, and its practical predictive power.\n\n\"Clocking the Mind : Mental Chronometry and Individual Differences\" (2006) deals with mental chronometry (MC), and covers a variety of techniques for measuring the speed with which the brain processes information. Whereas IQ merely represents an interval (ranking) scale and thus possesses no true ratio scale properties, Jensen argues mental chronometry represents a true natural science of mental ability.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3032", "title": "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum", "text": "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\n\nA Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart.\n\nInspired by the farces of the ancient Roman playwright Plautus (251–183 BC), specifically \"Pseudolus\", \"Miles Gloriosus\", and \"Mostellaria\", the musical tells the bawdy story of a slave named Pseudolus and his attempts to win his freedom by helping his young master woo the girl next door. The plot displays many classic elements of farce, including puns, the slamming of doors, cases of mistaken identity (frequently involving characters disguising themselves as one another), and satirical comments on social class. The title derives from a line often used by vaudeville comedians to begin a story: \"A funny thing happened on the way to the theater\".\n\nThe musical's original 1962 Broadway run won several Tony Awards, including Best Musical and Best Author (Musical). \"A Funny Thing\" has enjoyed several Broadway and West End revivals and was made into a successful film starring the original lead of the musical, Zero Mostel.\n\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" opened on Broadway on May 8, 1962, at the Alvin Theatre, and then transferred to the Mark Hellinger Theatre and the Majestic Theatre, where the show closed on August 29, 1964, after 964 performances and 8 previews.\n\nThe show's creators originally wanted Phil Silvers in the lead role of Pseudolus, but he turned them down, allegedly because he would have to perform onstage without his glasses, and his vision was so poor that he feared tripping into the orchestra pit. He is also quoted as turning down the role for being \"Sgt. Bilko in a toga\". (Silvers eventually played the role — wearing his glasses — in a 1972 revival. In the film, he played Marcus Lycus.) Milton Berle also passed on the role. Eventually, Zero Mostel was cast.\n\nDuring the out of town pre-Broadway tryouts the show was attracting little business and not playing well. Jerome Robbins was called in to give advice and make changes. The biggest change Robbins made was a new opening number to replace \"Love Is in the Air\" and introduce the show as a bawdy, wild comedy. Stephen Sondheim wrote the song \"Comedy Tonight\" for this new opening. From that point on, the show was a success.\n\nIt was directed by George Abbott and produced by Hal Prince, with choreography by Jack Cole and uncredited staging and choreography by Robbins. The scenic and costume design was by Tony Walton. This wardrobe is on display at the Costume World Broadway Collection in Pompano Beach, Florida. The lighting design was by Jean Rosenthal. Along with Mostel, the musical featured a cast of seasoned performers, including Jack Gilford (Mostel's friend and fellow blacklist member), David Burns, John Carradine, Ruth Kobart, and Raymond Walburn. The young lovers were played by Brian Davies and Preshy Marker. Karen Black, originally cast as the ingenue, was replaced out of town.\n\nThe show won several Tony Awards: Best Musical, Best Actor, Best Supporting Actor (Burns), Best Book, and Best Director. The score, however, was coolly received; it was Sondheim's first musical on Broadway in which he wrote both the music and lyrics, and did not earn a nomination for Best Original Score.\n\nThe show was presented two times in London's West End. The 1963 production and its 1986 revival were staged at the Strand Theatre and the Piccadilly Theatre respectively, and featured Frankie Howerd starring as Pseudolus, Kenneth Connor as Hysterium, 'Monsewer' Eddie Gray as Senex, Jon Pertwee as Marcus Lycus, and Leon Greene as Miles Gloriosus.\n\nIn 2004 there was a limited-run revival at the Royal National Theatre Olivier Theatre, starring Desmond Barrit as Pseudolus, Philip Quast as Miles Gloriosus, Hamish McColl as Hysterium and Isla Blair as Domina (who had previously played Philia in the 1963 production). This production was nominated for the 2005 Olivier Award, Outstanding Musical Production.\n\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" was made into a musical film in 1966, directed by Richard Lester, with Mostel and Gilford re-creating their Broadway stage roles, Leon Greene reprising his West End stage role, and Phil Silvers in an expanded role as \"Marcus Lycus\". David Burns did not return for the film role of Senex, which was played in the film by Michael Hordern. Buster Keaton made his final film appearance in the role of Erronius.\n\nA revival opened on Broadway at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre on April 4, 1972 and closed on August 12, 1972 after 156 performances. Directed by co-author Burt Shevelove the cast starred Phil Silvers as Pseudolus (later replaced by Tom Poston), Lew Parker as Senex, Carl Ballantine as Lycus and Reginald Owen as Erronius. Larry Blyden, who played Hysterium, the role created by Jack Gilford, also co-produced. \"Pretty Little Picture\" and \"That'll Show Him\" were dropped from the show, and were replaced with \"Echo Song\" (sung by Hero and Philia), and \"Farewell\" (added for Nancy Walker as Domina, as she and Senex depart for the country). \"Echo Song\" and \"Farewell\" had been added to a production staged in Los Angeles the previous year and were composed by Sondheim. They had to close soon after Phil Silvers suffered a stroke. The show won two Tony Awards, Best Leading Actor in a Musical for Silvers, and Best Featured Actor in a Musical for Blyden.\n\nThe musical was revived again with great success in 1996, opening at the St. James Theatre on April 18, 1996 and closing on January 4, 1998 after 715 performances. The cast starred Nathan Lane as Pseudolus (replaced by Whoopi Goldberg and later by David Alan Grier), Mark Linn-Baker as Hysterium, Ernie Sabella as Lycus, Jim Stanek as Hero, Lewis J. Stadlen as Senex, and Cris Groenendaal as Miles Gloriosus. The production was directed by Jerry Zaks, with choreography by Rob Marshall. Lane won the 1996 Tony Award for Best Leading Actor and the Dramas Desk Award, Outstanding Actor in a Musical; the production was nominated for the 1996 Tony Award and Drama Desk Award, Revival of a Musical.\n\nEvery actor who has opened in the role of Pseudolus on Broadway (Zero Mostel, Phil Silvers, and Nathan Lane) has won a Best Leading Actor Tony Award for his performance. In addition, Jason Alexander, who performed as Pseudolus in one scene in \"Jerome Robbins' Broadway\", also won a Tony for Best Actor in a Musical.\n\nThe Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts produced a limited-run revival of the musical from January 11 to 27, 2008. The production was directed by Randal K. West, with Justin Hill as musical director and Adam Cates as choreographer. The cast featured Richard Kind as Pseudolus, Joel Blum as Senex, Stephen DeRosa as Marcus Lycus, Sean McCall as Hysterium, and Steve Wilson as Miles Gloriosus. It also featured Diana Upton-Hill, Ryan Gaffney, Stephen Mark Crisp, Jack Kloppenborg, and Margret Clair.\n\nThe Chung Ying Theatre Company in Hong Kong staged a Cantonese version of the musical at Kwai Tsing Theatre, to celebrate the company's 30th anniversary. It was directed by Chung King Fai and Ko Tin Lung and ran from 14 to 21 March 2009.\n\nThe Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Ontario, Canada production ran from June 11 to November 7, 2009, with Des McAnuff directing and Wayne Cilento as choreographer. Bruce Dow originally performed the role of Pseudolus, but was forced to withdraw from the entire 2009 season due to an injury, and the role was then performed by Seán Cullen as of September 5, 2009. Stephen Ouimette played Hysterium. Mirvish Productions presented the earlier Stratford production at the Canon Theatre, Toronto, in December 2010 through January 2011. Bruce Dow and Sean Cullen were alternates in the lead role.\n\nIn October 2012 the play opened at Her Majesty's Theatre, Melbourne, Australia, with Geoffrey Rush as Pseudolus, Magda Szubanski as Domina and Shane Bourne as Senex. Stephen Sondheim came to Melbourne specifically to watch the show.\n\n\"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" was produced at Two River Theater in Red Bank, New Jersey from November 14, 2015 to December 13, 2015. The production was performed by an all male cast (Paul Castree, Eddie Cooper, Kevin Isola, David Josefsberg, Max Kumangai, Graham Rowat, Manny Stark, Bobby Conte Thornton, David Turner, Michael Urie, Tom Deckman, and Christopher Fitzgerald).\n\nIn ancient Rome, some neighbors live in three adjacent houses. In the center is the house of Senex, who lives there with wife Domina, son Hero, and several slaves, including head slave Hysterium and the musical's main character Pseudolus. A slave belonging to Hero, Pseudolus wishes to buy, win, or steal his freedom. One of the neighboring houses is owned by Marcus Lycus, who is a buyer and seller of beautiful women; the other belongs to the ancient Erronius, who is abroad searching for his long-lost children (stolen in infancy by pirates).\n\nOne day, Senex and Domina go on a trip and leave Pseudolus in charge of Hero. Hero confides in Pseudolus that he is in love with the lovely Philia, one of the courtesans in the House of Lycus (albeit still a virgin). Pseudolus promises to help him win Philia's love in exchange for his own freedom. Unfortunately (as the two find out when they pay a visit on Lycus), Philia has been sold to the renowned warrior Miles Gloriosus, who is expected to claim her very soon. Pseudolus, an excellent liar, uses Philia's cheery disposition to convince Lycus that she has picked up a plague from Crete, which causes its victims to smile endlessly in its terminal stages. By offering to isolate her in Senex's house, he is able to give Philia and Hero some time alone together, and the two fall in love. But Philia insists that, even though she is in love with Hero, she must honor her contract with the Captain, for \"that is the way of a courtesan.\" To appease her, he tells her to wait (\"that's what virgins do best, isn't it?\") inside, and that he will have the captain knock three times when he arrives. Pseudolus comes up with a plan to slip Philia a sleeping potion that will render her unconscious. He will then tell Lycus that she has died of the Cretan plague, and will offer to remove the body. Hero will come along, and they will stow away on a ship headed for Greece. Satisfied with his plan, Pseudolus steals Hysterium's book of potions and has Hero read him the recipe for the sleeping potion; the only ingredient he lacks is \"mare's sweat\", and Pseudolus goes off in search of some.\n\nUnexpectedly, Senex returns home early from his trip, and knocks three times on his own door. Philia comes out of the house, and, thinking that Senex is the Captain, offers herself up to him. Surprised but game, Senex instructs Philia to wait in the house for him, and she does. Hysterium arrives to this confusion, and tells Senex that Philia is the new maid that he has hired. Pseudolus returns, having procured the necessary mare's sweat; seeing that Senex has returned unexpectedly and grasping the need to keep him out of the way, Pseudolus discreetly sprinkles some of the horse-sweat onto him, then suggests that the road trip has left Senex in dire need of a bath. Taking the bait, Senex instructs Hysterium to draw him a bath in the long-abandoned house of Erronius. But while this is happening, Erronius returns home, finally having given up the search for his long-lost children. Hysterium, desperate to keep him out of the house where his master is bathing, tells the old man that his house has become haunted – a story seemingly confirmed by the sound of Senex singing in his bath. Erronius immediately determines to have a soothsayer come and banish the spirit from his house, and Pseudolus obligingly poses as one, telling Erronius that, in order to banish the spirit, he must travel seven times around the seven hills of Rome (thus keeping the old man occupied and out of the way for quite a while).\n\nWhen Miles Gloriosus arrives to claim his courtesan-bride, Pseudolus hides Philia on the roof of Senex's house; told that she has \"escaped,\" Lycus is terrified to face the Captain's wrath. Pseudolus offers to impersonate Lycus and talk his way out of the mess but, his ingenuity flagging, he ends up merely telling the Captain that Philia has disappeared, and that he, \"Lycus\", will search for her. Displeased and suspicious, Miles insists that his soldiers accompany Pseudolus, but the wily slave loses them in Rome's winding streets.\n\nComplicating matters further, Domina returns from her trip early, suspicious that her husband Senex is \"up to something low.\" She disguises herself in virginal white robes and a veil (much like Philia's) to try to catch Senex being unfaithful. Pseudolus convinces Hysterium to help him by dressing in drag and pretending to be Philia, \"dead\" from the plague. Unfortunately, it turns out that Miles Gloriosus has just returned from Crete, where there is of course no actual plague. With the ruse thus revealed, the main characters run for their lives, resulting in a madcap chase across the stage with both Miles and Senex pursuing all three \"Philia\"s (Domina, Hysterium, and the actual Philia – all wearing identical white robes and veils). Meanwhile, the courtesans from the house of Marcus Lycus – who had been recruited as mourners at \"Philia\"'s ersatz funeral – have escaped, and Lycus sends his eunuchs out to bring them all back, adding to the general pandemonium.\n\nFinally, the Captain's troops are able to round everyone up. His plot thoroughly unraveled, Pseudolus appears to be in deep trouble – but Erronius, completing his third circuit of the Roman hills, shows up fortuitously to discover that Miles Gloriosus and Philia are wearing matching rings which mark them as his long-lost children. Philia's betrothal to the Captain is nullified by the unexpected revelation that he's her brother, and, as the daughter or a free-born citizen, she's freed from Marcus Lycus. Philia weds Hero; Pseudolus gets his freedom and the lovely courtesan Gymnasia; Gloriosus receives twin courtesans to replace Philia; and Erronius is reunited with his children. A happy ending prevails for all – except for poor Senex, stuck with his shrewish wife Domina.\n\n\nAct I\n\nAct II\nNotes: \n\n\nNotes\nBibliography\n\n"}
{"id": "3034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3034", "title": "Aleut", "text": "Aleut\n\nThe Aleuts () (\"Aleut'y\"), who are usually known in the Aleut language by the endonym Unangax̂ Унаңан (lit. \"people\", Unangan, singular), are the indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands.\n\nBoth the Unangax̂ and the islands are divided between the US state of Alaska and the Russian administrative division of Kamchatka Krai.\n\nWhile English and Russian are the dominant languages used by Aleuts living in the United States and Russia respectively, the Aleut language is still spoken by an estimated 150 people in the United States and 5 people in Russia. The language belongs to the Eskimo-Aleut language family and includes three dialect groupings: Eastern Aleut, spoken on the Eastern Aleutian, Shumagin, Fox and Pribilof Islands; Atkan, spoken on Atka and Bering islands; and the now extinct Attuan dialect. The Pribilof Islands boast the highest number of active speakers of Aleutian. Most of the Native elders speak Aleut, but it is very rare for an everyday person to speak the language fluently.\n\nAleut was written in the Cyrillic script beginning in 1829. From 1870, the language was written in the Latin script. An Aleut dictionary and grammar have been published, and portions of the Bible were translated into Aleut.\n\nThe Aleut (Unangan) dialects and tribes:\n\n\nThe Aleut people (Unangax̂) historically lived throughout the Aleutian Islands, the Shumagin Islands, and the far western part of the Alaska Peninsula, with an estimated population of around 25,000 prior to European contact. In the 1820s, the Russian-American Company administered a large portion of the North Pacific during a Russian-led expansion of the fur trade. They resettled many Aleut families to the Commander Islands (within the Aleutsky District of the Kamchatka Krai in Russia) and to the Pribilof Islands (in Alaska). These continue to have majority-Aleut communities.\n\nAccording to the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut, while 17,000 identified as having partial Aleut ancestry. Prior to sustained European contact, approximately 25,000 Aleut lived in the archipelago. The Encyclopædia Britannica Online says more than 15,000 people have Aleut ancestry in the early 21st century. The Aleut suffered high fatalities in the 19th and early 20th centuries from Eurasian infectious diseases to which they had no immunity. In addition, the population suffered as their customary lifestyles were disrupted. Russian traders and later Europeans married Aleut women and had families with them.\n\nAfter the arrival of Russian Orthodox missionaries in the late 18th century, many Aleuts became Christian. Of the numerous Russian Orthodox congregations in Alaska, most are majority Alaska Native in ethnicity. One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut.\n\nIn the 18th century, Russia \"promyshlenniki\" traders established settlements on the islands. There was high demand for the furs that the Aleut provided from hunting. In May 1784, local Aleut revolted on Amchitka against the Russian traders. (The Russians had a small trading post there.) According to what Aleut people said, in an account recorded by Japanese castaways and published in 2004, otters were decreasing year by year. The Russians paid the Aleut less and less in goods in return for the furs they made. The Japanese learned that the Aleut felt the situation was at crisis. The leading Aleuts negotiated with the Russians, saying they had failed to deliver enough supplies in return for furs. Nezimov, leader of the Russians, ordered two of his men, Stephanov (ステッパノ \"Suteppano\") and Kazhimov (カジモフ \"Kazimofu\") to kill his mistress Oniishin (オニイシン \"Oniishin\"), who was the Aleut chief's daughter, because he doubted that Oniishin had tried to dissuade her father and other leaders from pushing for more goods.\n\nThat evening, hundreds of Aleut men gathered on a mountain and marched to the Russians' houses. When five Russians opened fire, the Aleuts ran away. The next day the Aleut returned, but escaped again when the Russians started firing. While the men attempted another attack the next day, they yelled and moved more quickly towards the house. As Russians opened fire, they started to run away again. After they ran, the Russians noticed that all the men had left the village. The Russians took around 40 women and children hostage, forcing the Aleut to surrender. The Russians killed four Aleut leaders.\n\nAfter the 4 leaders had been killed, the Aleut began to move from Amchitka to neighboring islands. Nezimov, leader of the Russian group, was jailed after the whole incident was reported to Russian officials. (According to , written by Katsuragawa Hoshū after interviewing Daikokuya Kōdayū.)\n\nIn 1811, in order to obtain more of the commercially valuable otter pelts, a party of Aleut hunters traveled to the coastal island of San Nicolas, near the Alta California-Baja California border. The locally resident Nicoleño nation sought a payment from the Aleut hunters for the large number of otters being killed in the area. Disagreement arose, turning violent; in the ensuing battle, the Aleut killed nearly all the Nicoleño men. Together with high fatalities from European diseases, the Nicoleños suffered so much from the loss of their men that by 1853, only one living Nicoleña person remained. (See Juana Maria, \"The Lone Woman of San Nicolas\", also known as Karana)\n\nIn 1942, during World War II, Japanese forces occupied Attu and Kiska Islands in the western Aleutians. They later transported captive Attu Islanders to Hokkaidō, where they were held as prisoners of war in harsh conditions. The United States government evacuated hundreds more Aleuts from the western chain and the Pribilofs during WWII, placing them in internment camps in southeast Alaska, where many died of starvation and disease. In total, about 75 died in American internment and 19 as a result of Japanese occupation. The Aleut Restitution Act of 1988 was an attempt by Congress to compensate the survivors. On June 17, 2017, the US Government formally apologized for the internment of the Unangan people and their treatment in the camps.\n\nThe World War II campaign by the United States to retake Attu and Kiska was a significant component of the operations in the Pacific theater.\n\nBefore major influence from outside, there were approximately 25,000 Aleuts on the archipelago. Foreign diseases, harsh treatment and disruption of traditional society soon reduced the population to less than one-tenth this number. The 1910 Census count showed 1,491 Aleuts. In the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut; nearly 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors. Alaskans generally recognize that intermarriage during the Russian occupation, while the colonists were limited in number, resulted in few full-blooded Aleuts remaining today. Full-blooded Aleuts still exist and are growing in number, and there are also people who may be part Russian or other descent but solely identify as Aleut.\n\nThe Aleut constructed partially underground houses called \"barabara\". According to Lillie McGarvey, a 20th-century Aleut leader, \"barabaras\" keep \"occupants dry from the frequent rains, warm at all times, and snugly sheltered from the high winds common to the area\". Aleuts traditionally built houses by digging an oblong square pit in the ground, usually or smaller. The pit was then covered by a roof framed with driftwood, thatched with grass, then covered with earth for insulation. Inside benches were placed along the sides, with a hearth in the middle. The bedrooms were at the back of the lodge, opposite the entrance.\n\nThe Aleut survived by hunting and gathering. They fished for salmon, crabs, shellfish, and cod, as well as harvesting sea mammals such as seal, walrus and whales. The fish and sea animals were processed in a variety of ways: dried, smoked or roasted. Caribou, musk oxen, deer, moose, whale and other types of game were eaten roasted or preserved for later use. Berries were dried. They were also processed as \"alutiqqutigaq\", a mixture of berries, fat and fish. The boiled skin and blubber of a whale was a delicacy, as was walrus.\nToday many Aleut continue to eat their traditional foods, but also buy the processed foods from Outside, which are very expensive in Alaska.\n\nTraditional arts of the Aleut include weapon-making, building of \"baidarkas\" (special hunting boats), weaving, figurines, clothing, carving, and mask making. Men as well as women often carved ivory and wood. 19th-century craftsmen were famed for their ornate wooden hunting hats, which feature elaborate and colorful designs and may be trimmed with sea lion whiskers, feathers, and ivory. Andrew Gronholdt of the Shumagin Islands has played a vital role in reviving the ancient art of building the \"chaguda-x\" or traditional bentwood hats.\n\nAleut women sewed finely stitched waterproof parkas from seal gut, and wove fine baskets from dune wildrye grass or \"Elymus mollis\". Some women continue to make baskets in this way. Aleut arts are practiced and taught throughout the state of Alaska. As many Aleut have moved out of the islands to other parts of the state, they have taken with them the knowledge of their arts. They have also adopted new materials and methods for their art.\n\nThe Aleut carved work, distinct in each region, has attracted traders for centuries, including early Europeans and other Alaska Natives. Historically carving was a male art and leadership attribute; in today’s world it is an art of both sexes. Most commonly the carvings of ivory and wood originated as part of making hunting weapons. Other carvings depicted the animals of their world, which were so important: such as seals and whales. They also depicted humans.\n\nThe Aleut also carve walrus ivory for other uses, such as jewelry and sewing needles. Jewelry is made with designs specific to the region of each people. Each clan would have a specific style to signify their origin. Jewelry ornaments were made for piercing lips (labrum), nose, and ears, as well as for necklaces. Each woman had her own sewing needles, which she made, and that often had detailed end of animal heads.\n\nThe main Aleut method of basketry was false embroidery (overlay). Strands of grasses or reeds were overlaid upon the basic weaving surface, to obtain a plastic effect. Basketry was an art reserved for women. Early Aleut women created baskets and woven mats of exceptional technical quality, using only their thumbnail, grown long and then sharpened, as a tool. Today, Aleut weavers continue to produce woven grass pieces of a remarkable cloth-like texture, works of modern art with roots in ancient tradition. Birch bark, puffin feathers, and baleen are also commonly used by the Aleut in basketry. The Aleut term for grass basket is \"qiigam aygaaxsii\". One Aleut leader recognized by the State of Alaska for her work in teaching and reviving Aleut basketry was Anfesia Shapsnikoff. Her life and accomplishments are portrayed in the book \"Moments Rightly Placed\"(1998).\n\nMasks were created to portray figures of their myths and oral history. The Atka people believed that another people lived in their land before them. They portrayed such ancients in their masks, which show anthropomorphic creatures named in their language. Knut Bergsland says their word means “like those found in caves.” Masks were generally carved from wood and were decorated with paints made from berries or other natural products. Feathers were inserted into holes carved out for extra decoration. These masks were used in ceremonies ranging from dances to praises, each with its own meaning and purpose.\n\nThe tattoos and piercings of the Aleut people demonstrated accomplishments as well as their religious views. They believed their body art would please the spirits of the animals and make any evil go away. The body orifices were believed to be pathways for the entry of evil entities. By piercing their orifices: the nose, the mouth, and ears, they would stop evil entities, \"khoughkh\", from entering their bodies (Osborn, 52). Body art also enhanced their beauty, social status, and spiritual authority.\n\nBefore the 19th century, piercings and tattoos were very common among the Aleut people, especially among women. Piercings, such as the nose pin, were common among both men and women and were usually performed a few days after birth. The ornament was made of various materials, a piece of bark or bone, or an eagle’s feather shaft. From time to time, adult women decorated the nose pins by hanging pieces of amber and coral from strings on it; the semi-precious objects dangled down to their chins.\n\nPiercing ears was also very common. The Aleuts pierced holes around the rim of their ears with dentalium shells (tooth shells or tusk shells), bone, feathers, dried bird wings or skulls and/or amber. Materials associated with birds were important, as birds were considered to defend animals in the spirit world. A male would wear sea lion whiskers in his ears as a trophy of his expertise as a hunter. Worn for decorative reasons, and sometimes to signify social standing, reputation, and the age of the wearer, Aleuts would pierce their lower lips with walrus ivory and wear beads or bones. The individual with the most piercings held the highest respect.\n\nTattooing for women began when they reached physical maturity, or menstruation, at about age 20. Men traditionally received their first tattoo after killing their first animal, another rite of passage. Sometimes tattoos signaled social class. For example, the daughter of a rich, famous ancestor or father would work hard at her tattoos to show the accomplishments of that ancestor or father. They would sew, or prick, different designs on the chin, the side of the face, or under the nose.\n\nThe Russians arrived in the Aleutian Islands in 1786 and were active there, with small trading settlements and religious missions, through the mid-19th century. They often enslaved the natives, forcing them to work for them. Their influence disrupted Aleut life, and many of the traditional customs disappeared.\n\nThe Aleut people developed in one of the harshest climates in the world, and learned to create and protect warmth. Both men and women wore parkas that extended below the knees. The women wore the skin of seal or sea-otter, and the men wore bird skin parkas, the feathers turned in or out depending on the weather. When the men were hunting on the water, they wore waterproof parkas made from seal or sea-lion guts, or the entrails of bear, walrus, or whales. Parkas had a hood that could be cinched, as could the wrist openings, so water could not get in. Men wore breeches made from the esophageal skin of seals. Children wore parkas made of downy eagle skin with tanned bird skin caps. They called these parkas \"kameikas,\" meaning raingear in the English language.(Aleut Corp. Web.).\n\nSea-lions, harbor seals, and the sea otters are the most abundant marine mammals. The men brought home the skins and prepared them by soaking them in urine and stretching them. The women undertook the sewing (\"Enthnohistory:\" Gross & Khera pg. 32). Preparation of the gut for clothing involved several steps. The prepared intestines were turned inside out. A bone knife was used to remove the muscle tissue and fat from the walls of the intestine. The gut was cut and stretched, and fastened to stakes to dry. It was then cut and sewn to make waterproof parkas, bags, and other receptacles (Turner, Ch. 5, pg. 70). On some hunting trips, the men would take several women with them. They would catch birds and prepare the carcasses and feathers for future use. They caught Puffins, Lunda Cirrhata, Fratercula Corniculata, Guillemots, and Cephus & Murres.\n\nIt took 40 skins of tufted puffin and 60 skins of horned puffin to make one parka. A woman would need a year for all the labor to make one parka. Each lasted two years with proper care. All parkas were decorated with bird feathers, beard bristles of seal and sea-lion, beaks of sea parrots, bird claws, sea otter fur, dyed leather, and caribou hair sewn in the seams. (Gross & Khera, pg. 34).\n\nWomen made needles from the wingbones of seabirds. They made thread from the sinews of different animals and fish guts. A thin strip of seal intestine could also be used, twisted to form a thread. The women grew their thumbnail extra long and sharpened it. They could split threads to make them as fine as a hair. They used vermilion paint, hematite, the ink bag of the octopus, and the root of a kind of grass or vine to color the threads.\n\nThe interior regions of the rough, mountainous Aleutian Islands provided little in terms of natural resources for the Aleutian people. They collected stones for weapons, tools, stoves or lamps. They collected and dried grasses for their woven baskets. For everything else, the Aleuts had learned to use the fish and mammals they caught and processed to satisfy their needs.\n\nIn order to hunt sea mammals and to travel between islands, the Aleuts became experts of sailing and navigation. While hunting, they used small watercraft called \"baidarkas.\" For regular travel, they used their large baidaras. \nThe baidara was a large, open, walrus-skin-covered boat. Aleut families used it when traveling among the islands. It was also used to transport goods for trade, and warriors took them to battle.\n\nThe baidarka (small skin boat) was a small boat covered in sea lion skin. It was developed and used for hunting because of its sturdiness and maneuverability. The Aleut baidarka resembles that of a Yup'ik kayak, but it is hydrodynamically sleeker and faster. They made the baidarka for one or two persons only. The deck was made with a sturdy chamber, the sides of the craft were nearly vertical and the bottom was rounded. Most one-man baidarkas were about feet long and wide, whereas a two-man was on average about long and wide. It was from the baidarka that Aleut men would stand on the water to hunt from the sea.\n\nThe Aleuts hunted small sea mammals with barbed darts and harpoons slung from throwing boards. These boards gave precision as well as some extra distance to these weapons.\n\nHarpoons were also called throwing-arrows when the pointed head fit loosely into the socket of the foreshaft and the head was able to detach from the harpoon when it penetrated an animal, and remain in the wound. There were three main kinds of harpoon that the Aleut’s used: a simple harpoon, with a head that kept its original position in the animal after striking, a compound (toggle-head) harpoon in which the head took a horizontal position in the animal after penetration, and the throwing-lance used to kill large animals.\n\nThe simple Aleut harpoon consisted of four main parts: the wooden shaft, the bone foreshaft, and the bonehead (tip) with barbs pointed backward. The barbed head was loosely fitted into the socket of the foreshaft so that when the animal was stabbed, it pulled the head away from the rest of the harpoon. The sharp barbs penetrated with ease, but could not be pulled out. The bone tip is fastened to a length of braided twine meanwhile; the hunter held the other end of the twine in his hand.\n\nThe compound harpoon was the most prevalent weapon of the Aleut people. Also known as the toggle-head spear, it was about the same size as the simple harpoon and used to hunt the same animals, however, this harpoon provided a more efficient and lethal weapon. This harpoon separated into four parts. The longest part was the shaft with the thicker stalk closer to the tip of the harpoon. The shaft was fitted into the socket of the fore shaft and a bone ring was then placed over the joint to hold the two pieces together, as well as, protecting the wooden shaft from splitting. Connected to the fore shaft of the harpoon is the toggle head spear tip. This tip was made of two sub shafts that break apart on impact with an animal. The upper sub shaft held the razor stone head and attached to the lower sub shaft with a small braided twine loop. Once the tip penetrates the animal the upper sub head broke off from the rest of the shaft, however, since it was still connected with the braided loop it rotated the head into a horizontal position inside the animal’s body so that it could not get away from the hunter.\n\nThe throwing lance may be distinguished from a harpoon because of the fact that all its pieces are fixed and immovable. A lance was a weapon of war and it was also used to kill large marine animals after it has already been harpooned. The throwing lance usually consisted of three parts: a wooden shaft, a bone ring or belt, and the compound head that was made with a barbed bonehead and a stone tip. The length of the compound head was equivalent to the distance between the planes of a man’s chest to his back. The lance would penetrate the chest and pass through the chest cavity and exit from the back. The bone ring was designed to break after impact so that the shaft could be used again for another kill.\n\nThey buried their dead ancestors near the village.\nArcheologists have found many different types of burials, dating from a variety of periods, in the Aleutian Islands. The Aleut developed a style of burials that were accommodated to local conditions, and honored the dead. They have had four main types of burials: \"umqan\", cave, above-ground sarcophagi, and burials connected to communal houses.\n\nUmqan burials are the most widely known type of mortuary practice found in the Aleutian Islands. The people created burial mounds, that tend to be located on the edge of a bluff. They placed stone and earth over the mound to protect and mark it. Such mounds were first excavated by archeologists in 1972 on Southwestern Unmak Island, and dated to the early contact period. Researchers have found a prevalence of these umqan burials, and concluded it is a regional mortuary practice. It may be considered a pan-Aleutian mortuary practice.\n\nCave burials have been found throughout the Eastern Aleutian Islands. The human remains are buried in shallow graves at the rear of the cave. These caves tend to be located next to middens and near villages. Some grave goods have been found in the caves associated with such burials. For example, a deconstructed boat was found in a burial cave on Kanaga Island. There were no other major finds of grave goods in the vicinity.\n\nThroughout the Aleutian Islands, gravesites have been found that are above-ground sarcophagi. These sarcophagi are left exposed, with no attempt to bury the dead in the ground. These burials tend to be isolated and limited to the remains of adult males, which may indicate a specific ritual practice. In the Near Islands, isolated graves have also been found with the remains, and not just the sarcophagus, left exposed on the surface. This way of erecting sarcophagi above ground is not as common as umqan and cave burials, but it is still widespread.\n\nAnother type of practice has been to bury remains in areas next to the communal houses of the settlement. Human remains are abundant in such sites. They indicate a pattern of burying the dead within the main activity areas of the settlement. These burials consist of small pits adjacent to the houses and scattered around them. In these instances, mass graves are common for women and children. This type of mortuary practice has been mainly found in the Near Islands.\n\nIn addition to these four main types, other kinds of burials have been found in the Aleutian Islands. These more isolated examples include mummification, private burial houses, abandoned houses, etc. To date, such examples are not considered to be part of a larger, unifying tradition. The findings discussed represent only the sites that have been excavated.\n\nThe variety of mortuary practices mostly did not included the ritual of including extensive grave goods, as has been found in other cultures. The remains so far have been mainly found with other human and faunal remains. The addition of objects to \"accompany\" the dead is rare. Archaeologists have been trying to dissect the absence of a great tradition of grave goods, but findings have been ambiguous and do not really help the academic community to understand these practices more.\n\nNot much information is known about the ritual parts of burying the dead. Archeologists and anthropologists have not found much evidence related to burial rituals. This lack of ritual evidence could hint at either no ritualized ceremony, or one that has not yet been revealed in the archaeological record. As a result, archaeologists cannot decipher the context to understand exactly why a certain type of burial was used in particular cases.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3035", "title": "Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act", "text": "Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act\n\nThe Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on December 18, 1971, constituting at the time the largest land claims settlement in United States history. ANCSA was intended to resolve long-standing issues surrounding aboriginal land claims in Alaska, as well as to stimulate economic development throughout Alaska. \n\nThe settlement established Alaska Native claims to the land by transferring titles to twelve Alaska Native regional corporations and over 200 local village corporations. A thirteenth regional corporation was later created for Alaska Natives who no longer resided in Alaska. The act is codified as 43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.\n\nWhen Alaska became a state in 1959, section 4 of the Alaska Statehood Act provided that any existing Alaska Native land claims would be unaffected by statehood and held in status quo. Yet while section 4 of the act preserved Native land claims until later settlement, section 6 allowed for the state government to claim lands deemed vacant. Section 6 granted the state of Alaska the right to select lands then in the hands of the federal government, with the exception of Native territory. As a result, nearly from the public domain would eventually be transferred to the state. The state government also attempted to acquire lands under section 6 of the Statehood Act that were subject to Native claims under section 4, and that were currently occupied and used by Alaska Natives. The federal Bureau of Land Management began to process the Alaska government's selections without taking into account the Native claims and without informing the affected Native groups.\n\nIt was against this backdrop that the original language for a land claims settlement was developed. \n\nA 9.2-magnitude earthquake struck the state in 1964. Recovery efforts drew the attention of the federal government, which found that Alaska Natives had the poorest living conditions in the country. The Federal Field Committee for Development Planning in Alaska decided that Natives should receive $100 million and the 10% revenue royalty. Nothing was done with this proposal, however, and a freeze on land transfers remained in effect. \n\nIn 1968, Governor Walter Hickel summoned a group of Native leaders to work out a settlement that would be satisfactory to Natives. The group met for ten days and asked for $20 million in exchange for requested lands. They also asked for 10% of federal mineral lease revenue.\n\nIn 1969 President Nixon appointed Hickel as Secretary of the Interior. The Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN) protested against Hickel’s nomination, but he was eventually confirmed.\n\nHickel worked with the AFN, negotiating with Native leaders and state government over the disputed lands. Offers went back and forth, with each rejecting the other’s proposals. The AFN wanted rights to land, while then Governor Keith Miller believed Natives did not have legitimate claims to state land in light of the provisions of the Alaska Statehood Act. \n\nBut a succeeding Alaska state administration under Governor William A. Egan would stake out positions upon which the AFN and other stakeholders could largely agree. Native leaders, in addition to the Alaska's congressional delegation and the state's newly elected Governor William A. Egan, eventually reached the basis for presenting an agreement to Congress. The proposed settlement terms faced challenges in both houses but found a strong ally in Senator Henry M. Jackson from Washington state. The most controversial issues that continued to hold up approval were methods for determining land selection by Alaska Natives and financial distribution.\n\nIn 1968, the Atlantic-Richfield Company discovered oil at Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic coast, catapulting the issue of land ownership into headlines. In order to lessen the difficulty of drilling at such a remote location and transporting the oil to the lower 48 states, the oil companies proposed building a pipeline to carry the oil across Alaska to the port of Valdez At Valdez, the oil would be loaded onto tankers and shipped to the contiguous states. The plan had been approved, but a permit to construct the pipeline, which would cross lands involved in the land claims dispute, could not be granted until the Native claims were settled.\n\nWith major petroleum dollars on the line, pressure mounted to achieve a definitive legislative resolution at the federal level. In 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act was signed into law by President Nixon. It abrogated Native claims to aboriginal lands except those that are the subject of the law. In return, Natives received up to of land and were paid $963 million. The land and money were to be divided among regional, urban, and village tribal corporations established under the law, often recognizing existing leadership.\n\nIn 1971, barely one million acres of land in Alaska was in private hands. ANCSA, together with section 6 of Alaska Statehood Act, which the new act allowed to come to fruition, affected ownership to about of land in Alaska once wholly controlled by the federal government. That is larger by than the combined areas of Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and Virginia.\n\nWhen the bill passed in 1971, it included provisions that had never before been attempted in previous United States settlements with Native Americans. The newly passed Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act created twelve Native regional economic development corporations. Each corporation was associated with a specific region of Alaska and the Natives who had traditionally lived there. This innovative approach to native settlements engaged the tribes in corporate capitalism. \n\nThe idea originated with the AFN, who believed that the Natives would have to become a part of the capitalist system in order to survive. As stockholders in these corporations, the Natives could earn some income and stay in their traditional villages. If the corporations were managed properly, they could make profits that would enable individuals to stay, rather than having to leave Native villages to find better work. This was intended to help preserve Native culture.\n\nAlaska Natives had three years from passage of ANCSA to make land selections of the granted under the act. In some cases Native corporations received outside aid in surveying the land. For instance, Doyon, Limited (one of the 13 regional corporations) was helped by the Geophysical Institute of the University of Alaska. The Institute determined which land contained resources such as minerals and coal. NASA similarly provided satellite imagery to aid in Native corporations finding areas most suited for vegetation and their traditional subsistence culture. The imagery showed locations of caribou and moose, as well as forests with marketable timber. In total about were analyzed for Doyon. Natives were able to choose tens of thousands of acres of land rich with timber while Doyon used mineral analysis to attract businesses.\n\nThe state of Alaska to date has been granted approximately 85% or of the land claims it has made under ANCSA. The state is entitled to a total of under the terms of the Statehood Act. Originally the state had 25 years after passage of the Alaska Statehood Act to file claims under section 6 of the act with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Amendments to ANCSA extended that deadline until 1994, with the expectation that BLM would complete processing of land transfers subject to overlapping Native claims by 2009. Nonetheless, some Native and state selections under ANCSA remained unresolved as late as December 2014.\n\nThere was largely positive reaction to ANCSA, although not entirely. The act was supported by Natives as well as non-Natives, and likewise enjoyed bipartisan support. Natives were heavily involved in the legislative process, and the final draft of the act used many AFN ideas. \n\nSome Natives have argued that ANCSA has hastened cultural genocide of Alaska Natives. Some Natives critiqued ANCSA as an illegitimate treaty since only tribal leaders were involved and the provisions of the act were not voted on by indigenous populations. One native described it as a social and political experiment. Critics have also argued that Natives so feared massacre or incarceration that they offered no resistance to the act. \n\nOthers have argued that the settlement was arguably the most generous afforded by the United States to a Native group. They note that some of the largest and most profitable corporations in the state are the twelve created by ANCSA. Other critics attacked the act as \"Native welfare\" and such complaints continue to be expressed. \n\nThe corporation system has been critiqued, as in some cases stockholders have sold land to outside corporations that have leveled forests and extracted minerals. But supporters of the system argue that it has provided economic benefits for indigenous peoples that outweigh these problems.\n\n\nThe following thirteen regional corporations were created under ANCSA:\n\nAdditionally, most regions and some villages have created their own nonprofits providing social services and health care through grant funding and federal compacts. The objectives of these nonprofits are varied, but focus generally on cultural and educational activities. These include scholarships for Native students, sponsorship of cultural and artistic events, preservation efforts for Native languages, and protection of sites with historic or religious importance.\n\nANCSA created about 224 village and urban corporations. Below is a representative list of village and urban corporations created under ANCSA:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3036", "title": "Adoptionism", "text": "Adoptionism\n\nAdoptionism, sometimes called dynamic monarchianism, is a nontrinitarian theological doctrine which holds that Jesus was adopted as the Son of God at his baptism, his resurrection, or his ascension. According to Epiphanius's account of the Ebionites, the group believed that Jesus was chosen on account of his sinless devotion to the will of God.\n\nAdoptionism was declared heresy at the end of the 2nd century and was rejected by the Synods of Antioch and the First Council of Nicaea, which defined the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity and identified the man Jesus with the eternally begotten Son or Word of God in the Nicene Creed.\n\nBart D. Ehrman suggests in \"The Orthodox Corruption of the Scripture\" that Adoptionist theology may date back almost to the time of Jesus.\n\nThe Gospel of Mark is believed by most modern scholars to be the first of the four canonical gospels to have been written, dating from the time of the fall of Jerusalem in AD 70. Mark gives prominent mention to the destruction of the Second Temple and appears to have provided source material for Matthew and Luke. Many details found in later writings do not appear in the earliest manuscripts of Mark, including the phrase \"Son of God\" at . Ehrman notes that this places the first use of the title \"Son of God\" for Jesus at his baptism, suggesting that Mark's gospel may reflect early Adoptionist views. The words \"Today I have begotten you\" are omitted from Mark, however; it is therefore generally believed to have less Adoptionist tendencies than the lost, non-canonical Gospel of the Hebrews.\n\nAdoptionist theology may also be reflected in canonical epistles, the earliest of which pre-date the writing of the gospels. The letters of Paul the Apostle, for example, do not mention a virgin birth of Christ. Paul describes Jesus as \"born of a woman, born under the law\" and \"as to his human nature was a descendant of David\" in the Epistle to the Galatians and the Epistle to the Romans. Many interpreters, however, take his statements in Philippians 2 to imply that Paul believed Jesus to have existed as equal to God before his incarnation. The Book of Hebrews, a contemporary sermon by an unknown author, describes God as saying \"You are my son; today I have begotten you.\" () The latter phrase, a quote of , could reflect an early Adoptionist view.\n\nThe first known exponent of Adoptionism in the 2nd century is Theodotus of Byzantium. According to Hippolytus of Rome (\"Philosophumena\", VII, xxiii) Theodotus taught that Jesus was a man born of a virgin, according to the Council of Jerusalem, that he lived like other men, and was most pious; but that at his baptism in the Jordan the \"Christ\" came down upon the man Jesus in the likeness of a dove. (Luke 3:22 And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased. Luke 4:1 And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,) Therefore, wonders (Greek \"dynameis\") were not wrought in him until the Spirit (which Theodotus called Christ) came down and was manifested in Him. (\"Philosophumena\", VII, xxiii) The belief was declared heretical by Pope Victor I.\n\nThe 2nd-century work Shepherd of Hermas also taught that Jesus was a virtuous man filled with the Holy Spirit and adopted as the Son. While the Shepherd of Hermas was popular and sometimes bound with the canonical scriptures, it didn't retain canonical status, if it ever had it.\n\nIn the 3rd century, Paul of Samosata, Patriarch of Antioch, promoted Adoptionism. He said Jesus had been a man who kept himself sinless and achieved union with God. His views, however, did not neatly fit in either of the two main forms of Monarchianism.\n\nSpanish Adoptionism was a theological position which was articulated in Umayyad and Christian-held regions of the Iberian peninsula in the 8th and 9th centuries. The issue seems to have begun with the claim of archbishop Elipandus of Toledo that – in respect to his human nature – Christ was \"adoptive\" Son of God. Another leading advocate of this Christology was Felix of Urgel. In Spain, Adoptionism was opposed by Beatus of Liebana, and in the Carolingian territories, the Adoptionist position was condemned by Pope Hadrian I, Alcuin of York, Agobard, and officially in Carolingian territory by the Council of Frankfurt (794).\n\nDespite the shared name of \"Adoptionism\" the Spanish Adoptionist Christology appears to have differed sharply from the Adoptionism of early Christianity. Spanish advocates predicated the term \"adoptivus\" of Christ only in respect to his humanity; once the divine Son \"emptied himself\" of divinity and \"took the form of a servant\" (Philippians 2:7), Christ's human nature was \"adopted\" as divine.\n\nHistorically, many scholars have followed the Adoptionists' Carolingian opponents in labeling Spanish Adoptionism as a minor revival of “Nestorian” Christology. John C. Cavadini has challenged this notion by attempting to take the Spanish Christology in its own Spanish/North African context in his study, \"The Last Christology of the West: Adoptionism in Spain and Gaul, 785–820\".\n\nA third wave was the revived form (\"Neo-Adoptionism\") of Peter Abelard in the 12th century. Later, various modified and qualified Adoptionist tenets emerged from some theologians in the 14th century. Duns Scotus (1300) and Durandus of Saint-Pourçain (1320) admit the term \"Filius adoptivus\" in a qualified sense. In more recent times the Jesuit Gabriel Vásquez, and the Lutheran divines Georgius Calixtus and Johann Ernst Immanuel Walch, have defended Adoptionism as essentially orthodox.\n\nA form of Adoptionism surfaced in Unitarianism during the 18th century as the virgin birth was increasingly denied by Unitarians . In the 19th century the term Psilanthropism, was applied by such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge who so called his own view that Jesus was the son of Joseph.\n\nA similar form of Adoptionism was expressed in the writings of James Strang, a Latter Day Saint leader who founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) after the death of Joseph Smith in 1844. In his Book of the Law of the Lord, a purported work of ancient scripture found and translated by Strang, he offers an essay entitled \"Note on the Sacrifice of Christ\" in which he explains his unique (for Mormonism as a whole) doctrines on the subject. Jesus Christ, said Strang, was the natural-born son of Mary and Joseph, who was chosen from before all time to be the Savior of mankind, but who had to be born as an ordinary mortal of two human parents (rather than being begotten by the Father or the Holy Spirit) to be able to truly fulfill his Messianic role. Strang claimed that the earthly Christ was in essence \"adopted\" as God's son at birth, and fully revealed as such during the Transfiguration. After proving himself to God by living a perfectly sinless life, he was enabled to provide an acceptable sacrifice for the sins of men, prior to his resurrection and ascension.\n\nAdoptionism is one of two main forms of monarchianism (the other is modalism, which regards \"Father\" and \"Son\" as two historical or soteriological roles of a single divine Person). Adoptionism (also known as dynamic monarchianism) denies the eternal pre-existence of Christ, and although it explicitly affirms his deity subsequent to events in his life, many classical trinitarians claim that the doctrine implicitly denies it by denying the constant hypostatic union of the eternal Logos to the human nature of Jesus. Under Adoptionism Jesus is currently divine and has been since his adoption, although he is not equal to the Father, per \"my Father is greater than I\" (). and as such is a kind of subordinationism.\n\nAdoptionism was one position in a long series of Christian disagreements about the precise nature of Christ (see Christology) in the developing dogma of the Trinity, an attempt to explain the relationship between Jesus of Nazareth, both as man and God, and God the Father while confidently claiming to be uncompromisingly monotheistic. It differs significantly from the doctrine of the Trinity that was later affirmed by the ecumenical councils.\n\nSome scholars see Adoptionist concepts in the Gospel of Mark and in the writings of the Apostle Paul. According to this view, though Mark has Jesus as the Son of God, references occurring at the strategic points in 1:1 (\"The beginning of the gospel about Jesus Christ, the Son of God\", but not in all versions, see Mark 1), 5:7 (\"What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God?\") and 15:39 (\"Surely this man was the Son of God!\"), the concept of the Virgin Birth of Jesus had not been developed or elucidated at the time of the writing of this early Christian text. By the time the Gospels of Luke and Matthew were written, Jesus is identified as being the Son of God from the time of birth. Finally, the Gospel of John portrays him as the pre-existent Word () as existing \"in the beginning\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3037", "title": "Apollinarism", "text": "Apollinarism\n\nApollinarism or Apollinarianism was a view proposed by Apollinaris of Laodicea (died 390) that Jesus could not have had a human mind; rather, Jesus had a human body and lower soul (the seat of the emotions) but a divine mind. \n\nThe Trinity had been recognized at the Council of Nicea in 325, but debate about exactly what it meant continued. A rival to the more common belief that Jesus Christ had two natures was monophysitism (\"one nature\"), the doctrine that Christ had only one nature. Apollinarism and Eutychianism were two forms of monophysitism. Apollinaris' rejection that Christ had a human mind was considered an over-reaction to Arianism and its teaching that Christ was not divine.\n\nTheodoret charged Apollinaris with confounding the persons of the Godhead and with giving in to the heretical ways of Sabellius. Basil of Caesarea accused him of abandoning the literal sense of the scripture, and taking up wholly with the allegorical sense. His views were condemned in a Synod at Alexandria, under Athanasius of Alexandria, in 362, and later subdivided into several different heresies, the main ones of which were the Polemians and the Antidicomarianites.\n\nIt was declared to be a heresy in 381 by the First Council of Constantinople, since Christ was officially depicted as fully human and fully God. Followers of Apollinarianism were accused of attempting to create a tertium quid (\"third thing,\" neither God nor man).\n\nApollinaris further taught, following Tertullian, that the souls of men were propagated by other souls, as well as their bodies (see traducianism). \n\nChristian philosopher William Lane Craig has proposed a neo-Apollinarian Christology in which the divine Logos completes the human nature of Christ. Craig says his proposal is tentative and he welcomes critique and interaction from other scholars.\n\n"}
{"id": "3038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3038", "title": "Acid–base reaction", "text": "Acid–base reaction\n\nAn acid–base reaction is a chemical reaction that occurs between an acid and a base. Several theoretical frameworks provide alternative conceptions of the reaction mechanisms and their application in solving related problems; these are called acid–base theories, for example, Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory. Their importance becomes apparent in analyzing acid–base reactions for gaseous or liquid species, or when acid or base character may be somewhat less apparent. The first of these concepts was provided by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, around 1776.\n\nThe first scientific concept of acids and bases was provided by Lavoisier in around 1776. Since Lavoisier's knowledge of strong acids was mainly restricted to oxoacids, such as (nitric acid) and (sulfuric acid), which tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen, and since he was not aware of the true composition of the hydrohalic acids (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI), he defined acids in terms of their containing \"oxygen\", which in fact he named from Greek words meaning \"acid-former\" (from the Greek οξυς (\"oxys\") meaning \"acid\" or \"sharp\" and γεινομαι (\"geinomai\") meaning \"engender\"). The Lavoisier definition was held as absolute truth for over 30 years, until the 1810 article and subsequent lectures by Sir Humphry Davy in which he proved the lack of oxygen in , HTe, and the hydrohalic acids. However, Davy failed to develop a new theory, concluding that \"acidity does not depend upon any particular elementary substance, but upon peculiar arrangement of various substances\". One notable modification of oxygen theory was provided by Berzelius, who stated that acids are oxides of nonmetals while bases are oxides of metals.\n\nIn 1838, Justus von Liebig proposed that an acid is a hydrogen-containing substance in which the hydrogen could be replaced by a metal. This redefinition was based on his extensive work on the chemical composition of organic acids, finishing the doctrinal shift from oxygen-based acids to hydrogen-based acids started by Davy. Liebig's definition, while completely empirical, remained in use for almost 50 years until the adoption of the Arrhenius definition.\n\nThe first modern definition of acids and bases in molecular terms was devised by Svante Arrhenius. A hydrogen theory of acids, it followed from his 1884 work with Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald in establishing the presence of ions in aqueous solution and led to Arrhenius receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1903.\n\nAs defined by Arrhenius:\n\nThis causes the protonation of water, or the creation of the hydronium (HO) ion. Thus, in modern times, the symbol H is interpreted as a shorthand for HO, because it is now known that a bare proton does not exist as a free species in aqueous solution.\nThe Arrhenius definitions of acidity and alkalinity are restricted to aqueous solutions, and refer to the concentration of the solvent ions. Under this definition, pure HSO and HCl dissolved in toluene are not acidic, and molten NaOH and solutions of calcium amide in liquid ammonia are not alkaline.\n\nOverall, to qualify as an Arrhenius acid, upon the introduction to water, the chemical must either cause, directly or otherwise:\n\nConversely, to qualify as an Arrhenius base, upon the introduction to water, the chemical must either cause, directly or otherwise:\n\nThe reaction of an acid with a base is called a neutralization reaction. The products of this reaction are a salt and water.\n\nIn this traditional representation an acid–base neutralization reaction is formulated as a double-replacement reaction. For example, the reaction of hydrochloric acid, HCl, with sodium hydroxide, NaOH, solutions produces a solution of sodium chloride, NaCl, and some additional water molecules.\n\nThe modifier (aq) in this equation was implied by Arrhenius, rather than included explicitly. It indicates that the substances are dissolved in water. Though all three substances, HCl, NaOH and NaCl are capable of existing as pure compounds, in aqueous solutions they are fully dissociated into the aquated ions H, Cl, Na and OH.\n\nThe Brønsted–Lowry definition, formulated in 1923, independently by Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted in Denmark and Martin Lowry in England, is based upon the idea of protonation of bases through the de-protonation of acids – that is, the ability of acids to \"donate\" hydrogen ions (H)—otherwise known as protons—to bases, which \"accept\" them.\n\nAn acid–base reaction is, thus, the removal of a hydrogen ion from the acid and its addition to the base. The removal of a hydrogen ion from an acid produces its \"conjugate base\", which is the acid with a hydrogen ion removed. The reception of a proton by a base produces its \"conjugate acid\", which is the base with a hydrogen ion added.\n\nUnlike the previous definitions, the Brønsted–Lowry definition does not refer to the formation of salt and solvent, but instead to the formation of \"conjugate acids\" and \"conjugate bases\", produced by the transfer of a proton from the acid to the base. In this approach, acids and bases are fundamentally different in behavior from salts, which are seen as electrolytes, subject to the theories of Debye, Onsager, and others. An acid and a base react not to produce a salt and a solvent, but to form a new acid and a new base. The concept of neutralization is thus absent. Brønsted–Lowry acid–base behavior is formally independent of any solvent, making it more all-encompassing than the Arrhenius model.\n\nThe general formula for acid–base reactions according to the Brønsted–Lowry definition is:\nwhere HA represents the acid, B represents the base, BH represents the conjugate acid of B, and A represents the conjugate base of HA.\n\nFor example, a Brønsted-Lowry model for the dissociation of hydrochloric acid (HCl) in aqueous solution would be the following:\n\nThe removal of H from the HCl produces the chloride ion, Cl, the conjugate base of the acid. The addition of H to the HO (acting as a base) forms the hydronium ion, HO, the conjugate acid of the base.\n\nWater is amphoteric—that is, it can act as both an acid and a base. The Brønsted-Lowry model explains this, showing the dissociation of water into low concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions:\n\nThis equation is demonstrated in the image below:\nHere, one molecule of water acts as an acid, donating an H and forming the conjugate base, OH, and a second molecule of water acts as a base, accepting the H ion and forming the conjugate acid, HO.\n\nAs an example of water acting as an acid, consider an aqueous solution of pyridine, CHN.\n\nIn this example, a water molecule is split into a hydrogen ion, which is donated to a pyridine molecule, and an hydroxide ion.\n\nIn the Brønsted-Lowry model, the solvent does not necessarily have to be water. For example, consider what happens when acetic acid, CHCOOH, dissolves in liquid ammonia.\n\nAn H ion is removed from acetic acid, forming its conjugate base, the acetate ion, CHCOO. The addition of an H ion to an ammonia molecule of the solvent creates its conjugate acid, the ammonium ion, NH.\n\nThe Brønsted–Lowry model calls hydrogen-containing substances (like HCl) acids. Thus, some substances, which many chemists considered to be acids, such as SO or BCl, are excluded from this classification due to lack of hydrogen. Gilbert N. Lewis wrote in 1938, \"To restrict the group of acids to those substances that contain hydrogen interferes as seriously with the systematic understanding of chemistry as would the restriction of the term oxidizing agent to substances containing oxygen.\" Furthermore, KOH and KNH are not considered Brønsted bases, but rather salts containing the bases OH and NH.\n\nThe hydrogen requirement of Arrhenius and Brønsted–Lowry was removed by the Lewis definition of acid–base reactions, devised by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1923, in the same year as Brønsted–Lowry, but it was not elaborated by him until 1938. Instead of defining acid–base reactions in terms of protons or other bonded substances, the Lewis definition defines a base (referred to as a \"Lewis base\") to be a compound that can donate an \"electron pair\", and an acid (a \"Lewis acid\") to be a compound that can receive this electron pair.\n\nFor example, boron trifluoride, BF is a typical Lewis acid. It can accept a pair of electrons as it has a vacancy in its octet. The fluoride ion has a full octet and can donate a pair of electrons. Thus\nis a typical Lewis acid, Lewis base reaction. All compounds of group 13 elements with a formula AX can behave as Lewis acids. Similarly, compounds of group 15 elements with a formula DY, such as amines, NR, and phosphines, PR, can behave as Lewis bases. Adducts between them have the formula XA←DY with a dative covalent bond, shown symbolically as ←, between the atoms A (acceptor) and D (donor). Compounds of group 16 with a formula DX may also act as Lewis bases; in this way, a compound like an ether, RO, or a thioether, RS, can act as a Lewis base. The Lewis definition is not limited to these examples. For instance, carbon monoxide acts as a Lewis base when it forms an adduct with boron trifluoride, of formula FB←CO\n\nAdducts involving metal ions are referred to as co-ordination compounds; each ligand donates a pair of electrons to the metal ion. The reaction\ncan be seen as an acid–base reaction in which a stronger base (ammonia) replaces a weaker one (water)\n\nThe Lewis and Brønsted–Lowry definitions are consistent with each other since the reaction\nis an acid–base reaction in both theories.\n\nOne of the limitations of the Arrhenius definition is its reliance on water solutions. Edward Curtis Franklin studied the acid–base reactions in liquid ammonia in 1905 and pointed out the similarities to the water-based Arrhenius theory. Albert F. O. Germann, working with liquid phosgene, , formulated the solvent-based theory in 1925, thereby generalizing the Arrhenius definition to cover aprotic solvents.\n\nGermann pointed out that in many solutions, there are ions in equilibrium with the neutral solvent molecules:\n\nFor example, water and ammonia undergo such dissociation into hydronium and hydroxide, and ammonium and amide, respectively:\n\nSome aprotic systems also undergo such dissociation, such as dinitrogen tetroxide into nitrosonium and nitrate, antimony trichloride into dichloroantimonium and tetrachloroantimonate, and phosgene into chlorocarboxonium and chloride:\n\nA solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvonium ions and a decrease in the concentration of solvate ions is defined as an \"acid\". A solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvate ions and a decrease in the concentration of the solvonium ions is defined as a \"base\".\n\nThus, in liquid ammonia, (supplying ) is a strong base, and (supplying ) is a strong acid. In liquid sulfur dioxide (), thionyl compounds (supplying ) behave as acids, and sulfites (supplying ) behave as bases.\n\nThe non-aqueous acid–base reactions in liquid ammonia are similar to the reactions in water:\n\nNitric acid can be a base in liquid sulfuric acid:\nThe unique strength of this definition shows in describing the reactions in aprotic solvents; for example, in liquid :\n\nBecause the solvent system definition depends on the solute as well as on the solvent itself, a particular solute can be either an acid or a base depending on the choice of the solvent: is a strong acid in water, a weak acid in acetic acid, and a weak base in fluorosulfonic acid; this characteristic of the theory has been seen as both a strength and a weakness, because some substances (such as and ) have been seen to be acidic or basic on their own right. On the other hand, solvent system theory has been criticized as being too general to be useful. Also, it has been thought that there is something intrinsically acidic about hydrogen compounds, a property not shared by non-hydrogenic solvonium salts.\n\nThis acid–base theory was a revival of oxygen theory of acids and bases, proposed by German chemist Hermann Lux in 1939, further improved by Håkon Flood circa 1947 and is still used in modern geochemistry and electrochemistry of molten salts. This definition describes an acid as an oxide ion () acceptor and a base as an oxide ion donor. For example:\n\nThis theory is also useful in the systematisation of the reactions of noble gas compounds, especially the xenon oxides, fluorides, and oxofluorides.\n\nMikhail Usanovich developed a general theory that does not restrict acidity to hydrogen-containing compounds, but his approach, published in 1938, was even more general than Lewis theory. Usanovich's theory can be summarized as defining an acid as anything that accepts negative species or donates positive ones, and a base as the reverse. This defined the concept of redox (oxidation-reduction) as a special case of acid–base reactions\n\nSome examples of Usanovich acid–base reactions include:\n\nIn 1963, Ralph Pearson proposed a qualitative concept known as the Hard and Soft Acids and Bases principle. later made quantitative with help of Robert Parr in 1984. 'Hard' applies to species that are small, have high charge states, and are weakly polarizable. 'Soft' applies to species that are large, have low charge states and are strongly polarizable. Acids and bases interact, and the most stable interactions are hard–hard and soft–soft. This theory has found use in organic and inorganic chemistry.\n\nThe ECW Model is quantitative model that describes and predicts the strength of Lewis acid base interactions, -ΔH . The model assigned E and C parameters to many Lewis acids and bases. Each acid is characterized by an E and a C. Each base is likewise characterized by its own E and C. The E and C parameters refer, respectively, to the electrostatic and covalent contributions to the strength of the bonds that the acid and base will form. The equation is\n\nThe W term represents a constant energy contribution for acid–base reaction such as the cleavage of a dimeric acid or base. The equation predicts reversal of acids and base strengths. The graphical presentations of the equation show that there is no single order of Lewis base strengths or Lewis acid strengths.\n\nThe reaction of a strong acid with a strong base is essentially a quantitative reaction. For example,\n\nIn this reaction both the sodium and chloride ions are spectators as the neutralization reaction,\ndoes not involve them. With weak bases addition of acid is not quantitative because a solution of a weak base is a buffer solution. A solution of a weak acid is also a buffer solution. When a weak acid reacts with a weak base an equilibrium mixture is produced. For example, adenine, written as AH can react with a hydrogen phosphate ion, .\n\nThe equilibrium constant for this reaction can be derived from the acid dissociation constants of adenine and of the dihydrogen phosphate ion.\n\nThe notation [X] signifies \"concentration of X\". When these two equations are combined by eliminating the hydrogen ion concentration, an expression for the equilibrium constant, \"K\" is obtained.\n\nAn acid–alkali reaction is a special case of an acid–base reaction, where the base used is also an alkali. When an acid reacts with an alkali salt (a metal hydroxide), the product is a metal salt and water. Acid–alkali reactions are also neutralization reactions.\n\nIn general, acid–alkali reactions can be simplified to\nby omitting spectator ions.\n\nAcids are in general pure substances that contain hydrogen cations () or cause them to be produced in solutions. Hydrochloric acid () and sulfuric acid () are common examples. In water, these break apart into ions:\n\nThe alkali breaks apart in water, yielding dissolved hydroxide ions:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3040", "title": "Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani", "text": "Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani\n\n`Ali ibn al-Husayn ul-Iṣfahānī (), also known as Abu-l-Faraj or, in the West, as Abulfaraj (897–967) was an historian of Arab-Quraysh origin who is noted for collecting and preserving ancient Arabic lyrics and poems in his major work, the \"Kitāb al-Aghānī\".\nAbu al-Faraj al-Iṣfahānī was born in Isfahan, but spent his youth and made his early studies in Baghdad. He was a direct descendant of the last of the Umayyad caliphs, Marwan II, and was thus connected with the Umayyad rulers in al-Andalus, and seems to have kept up a correspondence with them and to have sent them some of his works. He became famous for his knowledge of early Arabian antiquities.\n\nHis later life was spent in various parts of the Islamic world, in Aleppo with its Hamdanid governor Sayf ad-Dawlah (to whom he dedicated the \"Book of Songs\"), in Ray with the Buwayhid vizier Ibn 'Abbad, and elsewhere.\n\nAlthough he wrote poetry, also an anthology of verses on the monasteries of Mesopotamia and Egypt, and a genealogical work, his fame rests upon his \"Book of Songs\" (Kitab al-Aghani).\n\n\"Kitab al-Aghani\" (\"Book of Songs\"), a twenty volumes work that relates the stories of composers, poets, and singers (both men and women), along with some of their anecdotes, from the oldest epoch of Arabic literature down to the 9th century. These stories are related through \"isnad\" channels. The poems were put to music, but the musical signs are no longer readable. Because of the accompanying biographical annotations on the authors and composers, the work is an important historical source. \nIt contains a mass of information as to the life and customs of the early Arabs, and is the most valuable authority we have for their pre-Islamic and early Islamic days.\n\n"}
{"id": "3043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3043", "title": "Alcobaça, Portugal", "text": "Alcobaça, Portugal\n\nAlcobaça () is a city and a municipality in Oeste Subregion, region Centro in Portugal, formerly included in the Estremadura Province. The city grew along the valleys of the rivers Alcoa and Baça, from which it derives its name. The municipality population in 2011 was 56,693, in an area of 408.14 km². The city proper has a population of 15,800 inhabitants.\n\nThe city of Alcobaça became notable after the first king of Portugal, Afonso Henriques, decided to build a church to commemorate the Conquest of Santarém from the Moors in 1147. The church later evolved into the Monastery of Alcobaça, one of the most magnificent gothic monuments in the country. In the church are the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro. Over the centuries this monastery played an important role in shaping Portuguese culture.\n\nA few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is the Monastery of Batalha, another gothic building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota. To the west of Alcobaça is the fishing village of Nazaré, now a popular resort town. To the south is the city of Caldas da Rainha and the medieval town of Óbidos. Also to the northeast is the town of Porto de Mós with its rebuilt castle.\n\nA town that only became notable in the 12th century when it was chosen as the future site of Portugal's largest church. In March 1147, the fledgling King Dom Afonso Henriques, defeated the Moors by capturing the city of Santarém. As a tribute to his victory he vowed to build a magnificent home for the Order of Cistercians. It took another 76 years before this task was completed. The monarchy continued to carry out further construction and 60 years later King Dinis built the main cloister. The Monastery was consecrated in 1262.\n\nThe church contains the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro and with it the story of the tragic liaison between Pedro and Inês. Forced at an early age as a royal duty, he was to marry Constanza, the \"Infanta\" (Princess) of Castile, but died shortly after the marriage. Dom Pedro escape with his true love and later lived in the city of Coimbra. His father, King Afonso IV, believing that the family of Inês was a threat to his own kingdom had her murdered. Shortly after the death of his father Dom Pedro declared that he had married Inês in a prior secret ceremony in Bragança, and promptly took a gruesome revenge on the killers and exhumed her body. He presented the embalmed corpse at the court with a crown on her head and demanded that all his courtiers kneel and individually pay homage to her decomposed hand. Today, their ornate tombs face each other so that on Judgment Day his first sight would be of his beloved Inês.\n\nDuring the following centuries the monks from this monastery had a major influence on the development of Portuguese culture. Notably, in 1269 they were the first to give public lessons to their flock, and later they produced the first authoritative history on Portugal in a series of books. In 1810 the invading French pillaged the Abbey taking with them most of its most important treasures, including the noteworthy library. The items that remained were later stolen in 1834 during an anti-clerical riot and the banning of the religious Orders in Portugal.\n\nAdministratively, the municipality is divided into 13 civil parishes (\"freguesias\"):\n\nThe main feature of the city is essentially the monastery that proudly presents a long and sombre façade with 18th-century embellishments. This austerity is further emphasized in the cloisters with its apt name of \"Cloister of Silence\". In contrast within the Abbey is the massive kitchen with a running stream specially diverted to pass through as a supply of fresh water. The open area of the kitchen chimney is large enough to take a whole ox for roasting. The surround to the sacristy doorway is an outstanding example of Manueline decoration. In 1794, Lord Beckford visited the Abbey and commented that he found some 300 monks \"living in a very splendid manner\"!\n\nA few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is another wondrous building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota in 1385, when Dom João I of Portugal defeated the Castilians and ensuring two hundred years of independence from the Castilian invaders. The construction of the Abbey at Batalha commenced in 1388 and was added to by various Portuguese Kings over these next two centuries. To the east of Batalha is the world-famous location of Fátima and a point of pilgrimage for the Roman Catholic religion due to the vision of the Virgin Mary in 1917 by three young children whilst tending their flock. To the west of Alcobaça is the well-known fishing village of Nazaré. Today, the village is now a small town and a popular holiday resort with most of its past and traditions having rapidly evaporated in the course of time. A very successful Portuguese feature film was made in the early 20th century that dramatically captured the primitive and dangerous life of these fishermen. Stoutly Catholic, the inhabitants have retained some of their past as can be still seen in their own particular style of costume. To the south is Caldas da Rainha and the quaint medieval town of Óbidos that is an attraction for any tourists that enjoys a true glimpse of the past. Also to the south is the town of Porto de Mós with its fanciful rebuilt castle. This town borders the Nature Reserve Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros. These 390 square kilometres of limestone-covered landscape is also known for its underground caverns. The best known being the Grutas de Mira de Aire can be visited and consists of tunnels, caverns with stalactites, stalagmites, lakes, and a music and light finale.\n\n\nAlcobaça is twinned with:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3044", "title": "Amphisbaena", "text": "Amphisbaena\n\nThe amphisbaena (, plural: amphisbaenae) is a mythological, ant-eating serpent with a head at each end. The creature is alternatively called the amphisbaina, amphisbene, amphisboena, amphisbona, amphista, amfivena, amphivena, or anphivena (the last two being feminine), and is also known as the \"Mother of Ants\". Its name comes from the Greek words \"amphis\", meaning \"both ways\", and \"bainein\", meaning \"to go\". According to Greek mythology, the amphisbaena was spawned from the blood that dripped from the Gorgon Medusa's head as Perseus flew over the Libyan Desert with it in his hand, after which Cato's army then encountered it along with other serpents on the march. Amphisbaena fed off of the corpses left behind. The amphisbaena has been referred to by various poets such as Nicander, John Milton, Alexander Pope, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, A. E. Housman and Allen Mandelbaum; as a mythological and legendary creature, it has been referenced by Lucan, Pliny the Elder, Isidore of Seville, and Thomas Browne, the last of whom debunked its existence.\n\nThis early description of the amphisbaena depicts a venomous, dual-headed snakelike creature. However, Medieval and later drawings often show it with two or more scaled feet, particularly chicken feet, and feathered wings. Some even depict it as a horned, dragon-like creature with a serpent-headed tail and small, round ears, while others have both \"necks\" of equal size so that it cannot be determined which is the rear head. Many descriptions of the amphisbaena say its eyes glow like candles or lightning, but the poet Nicander seems to contradict this by describing it as \"always dull of eye\". He also says: \"From either end protrudes a blunt chin; each is far from each other.\" Nicander's account seems to be referring to what is indeed called the Amphisbaenia.\n\nThe amphisbaena is said to make its home in the desert.\n\nIn ancient times, the supposedly dangerous amphisbaena had many uses in the art of folk medicine and other such remedies. It was said that expecting women wearing a live amphisbaena around their necks would have safe pregnancies; however, if one's goal was to cure ailments such as arthritis or the common cold, one should wear only its skin. By eating the meat of the amphisbaena, one could supposedly attract many lovers of the opposite sex, and slaying one during the full moon could give power to one who is pure of heart and mind. Lumberjacks suffering from cold weather on the job could nail its carcass or skin to a tree to keep warm, while in the process allowing the tree to be felled more easily.\n\nIn \"The Book of Beasts\", T.H. White suggests that the creature derives from sightings of the worm lizards of the same name. These creatures are found in the Mediterranean countries where many of these legends originated.\n\nIn John Milton's Paradise Lost, after the Fall and the return of Satan to Hell, some of the fallen angelic host are transformed into the amphisbaena, to represent the animal by which the Fall was caused, i.e. a snake. \nThe amphisbaena is mentioned in the first book of Andrzej Sapkowski's the The Witcher series, i.e. The Last Wish, when The Witcher's protagonist, Geralt of Rivia, is recalling past events when he meets an old acquaintance named Irion. The amphisbaena was endangering the region of Kovir until the beast was slain by Geralt's hand.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3045", "title": "Amyl alcohol", "text": "Amyl alcohol\n\nAn amyl alcohol is any of 8 alcohols with the formula CHOH. A mixture of amyl alcohols (also called amyl alcohol) can be obtained from fusel alcohol. Amyl alcohol is used as a solvent and in esterfication, by which is produced amyl acetate and other important products. The name \"amyl alcohol\" without further specification applies to the normal (straight-chain) form, 1-pentanol.\n\nThese are the 8 structural isomers of alcohols with molecular formula CHO:\n\nThree of these alcohols, active amyl alcohol (2-methylbutan-1-ol), methyl (n) propyl carbinol (pentan-2-ol), and methyl isopropyl carbinol (3-methylbutan-2-ol), contain an asymmetric carbon atom and are therefore optically active.\n\nThe most important is isobutyl carbinol, the chief constituent of fermentation amyl alcohol and a constituent of fusel oil. It can be separated from fusel oil by either of two methods: shaking with strong brine solution and separating the oily layer from the brine layer; distilling it and collecting the fraction that boils between 125 and 140 °C. Further purification is possible with this procedure: shaking the product with hot limewater, separating the oily layer, drying the product with calcium chloride, and distilling it, collecting the fraction boiling between 128 and 132 °C.\n\nIsobutyl carbinol can be synthesized from isobutanol by conversion into isovaleraldehyde, which is subsequently reduced to isobutyl carbinol by means of sodium amalgam. It is a colourless liquid of density 0.8247 g/cm³ (0 °C), boiling at 131.6 °C, slightly soluble in water, and easily dissolved in organic solvents. It has a characteristic strong smell and a sharp burning taste. Amyl alcohol has an oral LD50 of 200 mg/kg in mice, suggesting that it is significantly more toxic than ethanol. On passing the vapour through a red-hot tube, it decomposes into acetylene, ethylene, propylene, and other compounds. It is oxidized by chromic acid to isovaleraldehyde, and it forms addition compounds crystals with calcium chloride and tin(IV) chloride.\n\nThe other amyl alcohols may be obtained synthetically. Of these, tertiary butyl carbinol has been the most difficult to obtain, with the first reported synthesis in 1891 by L. Tissier using the reduction of a mixture of trimethyl acetic acid and trimethylacetyl chloride with sodium amalgam. It is a solid that melts at 48 to 50 °C and boils at 112.3 °C.\n"}
{"id": "3046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3046", "title": "Amyl nitrite", "text": "Amyl nitrite\n\nAmyl nitrite is a chemical compound with the formula CHONO. A variety of isomers are known, but they all feature an amyl group attached to the nitrite functional group. The alkyl group is unreactive and the chemical and biological properties are mainly due to the nitrite group. Like other alkyl nitrites, amyl nitrite is bioactive in mammals, being a vasodilator, which is the basis of its use as a prescription medicine. As an inhalant, it also has a psychoactive effect, which has led to its recreational use with its smell being described as that of old socks or dirty feet. It is also referred to as banapple gas.\n\n\nThe term \"amyl nitrite\" encompasses several isomers. For example, a common form of amyl nitrite with the formula (CH)CHCHCHONO may be more specifically referred to as isoamyl nitrite. When the amyl group is a linear or normal (n) alkyl group, the resulting amyl nitrite would have the structural formula CH(CH)ONO.\n\nDespite a very similar name to amyl nitrite, amyl nitrate has a different chemical composition and different properties. Vast numbers of people confuse the two drugs, especially those wishing to purchase \"poppers\" (amyl nitrite) for recreational purposes.\n\nAlkyl nitrites are prepared by the reaction of alcohols with nitrous acid:\n\nThe reaction is called esterification. Synthesis of alkyl nitrites is, in general, straightforward and can be accomplished in home laboratories. A common procedure includes the dropwise addition of concentrated sulfuric acid to a cooled mixture of an aqueous sodium nitrite solution and an alcohol. The intermediately-formed stoichiometric mixture of nitrogen dioxide and nitric oxide then converts the alcohol to the alkyl nitrite, which, due to its low density, will form an upper layer that can be easily decanted from the reaction mixture.\n\nIsoamyl nitrite decomposes in the presence of base to give nitrite salts and the isoamyl alcohol:\n\nAmyl nitrite, like other alkyl nitrites, reacts with carbanions to give oximes.\n\nAmyl nitrites are also useful as reagents in a modification of the Sandmeyer reaction. The reaction of the alkyl nitrite with an aromatic amine in a halogenated solvent produces a radical aromatic species, this then frees a halogen atom from the solvent. For the synthesis of aryl iodides diiodomethane is used, whereas bromoform is the solvent of choice for the synthesis of aryl bromides.\n\nAmyl nitrite, in common with other alkyl nitrites, is a potent vasodilator; it expands blood vessels, resulting in lowering of the blood pressure. Alkyl nitrites are a source of nitric oxide, which signals for relaxation of the involuntary muscles. Physical effects include decrease in blood pressure, headache, flushing of the face, increased heart rate, dizziness, and relaxation of involuntary muscles, especially the blood vessel walls and the internal and external anal sphincter. There are no withdrawal symptoms. Overdose symptoms include nausea, vomiting, hypotension, hypoventilation, shortness of breath, and fainting. The effects set in very quickly, typically within a few seconds and disappear within a few minutes. Amyl nitrite may also intensify the experience of synesthesia.\n\n"}
{"id": "3049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3049", "title": "Autumn", "text": "Autumn\n\nAutumn (British English) or fall (American English) is one of the four temperate seasons. Autumn marks the transition from summer to winter, in September (Northern Hemisphere) or March (Southern Hemisphere), when the arrival of night becomes noticeably earlier and the arrival of day becomes noticeably later, and the temperature cools down considerably. One of its main features is the shedding of leaves from deciduous trees.\n\nSome cultures regard the autumnal equinox as \"mid-autumn\", while others with a longer temperature lag treat it as the start of autumn. Meteorologists (and most of the temperate countries in the southern hemisphere) use a definition based on months, with autumn being September, October and November in the northern hemisphere, and March, April and May in the southern hemisphere.\n\nIn North America, autumn is usually considered to start with the September equinox (21 to 24 September) and end with the winter solstice (21 or 22 December). Popular culture in North America associates Labor Day, the first Monday in September, as the end of summer and the start of autumn; certain summer traditions, such as wearing white, are discouraged after that date. As daytime and nighttime temperatures decrease, trees shed their leaves. In traditional East Asian solar term, autumn starts on or around 8 August and ends on or about 7 November. In Ireland, the autumn months according to the national meteorological service, Met Éireann, are September, October and November. However, according to the Irish Calendar, which is based on ancient Gaelic traditions, autumn lasts throughout the months of August, September and October, or possibly a few days later, depending on tradition. In Australia and New Zealand, autumn officially begins on 1 March and ends on 31 May.\n\nThe word \"autumn\" comes from the ancient Etruscan root \"autu-\" and has within it connotations of the passing of the year. It was borrowed by the neighbouring Romans, and became the Latin word \"autumnus\". After the Roman era, the word continued to be used as the Old French word \"autompne\" (\"automne\" in modern French) or \"autumpne\" in Middle English, and was later normalised to the original Latin. In the Medieval period, there are rare examples of its use as early as the 12th century, but by the 16th century, it was in common use.\n\nBefore the 16th century, \"harvest\" was the term usually used to refer to the season, as it is common in other West Germanic languages to this day (cf. Dutch \"herfst\", German \"Herbst\" and Scots \"hairst\"). However, as more people gradually moved from working the land to living in towns, the word \"harvest\" lost its reference to the time of year and came to refer only to the actual activity of reaping, and \"autumn\", as well as \"fall\", began to replace it as a reference to the season.\n\nThe alternative word \"fall\" for the season traces its origins to old Germanic languages. The exact derivation is unclear, with the Old English \"fiæll\" or \"feallan\" and the Old Norse \"fall\" all being possible candidates. However, these words all have the meaning \"to fall from a height\" and are clearly derived either from a common root or from each other. The term came to denote the season in 16th century England, a contraction of Middle English expressions like \"fall of the leaf\" and \"fall of the year\".\n\nDuring the 17th century, English emigration to the British colonies in North America was at its peak, and the new settlers took the English language with them. While the term \"fall\" gradually became obsolete in Britain, it became the more common term in North America.\n\nThe name \"backend,\" a once common name for the season in Northern England, has today been largely replaced by the name autumn.\n\nAssociation with the transition from warm to cold weather, and its related status as the season of the primary harvest, has dominated its themes and popular images. In Western cultures, personifications of autumn are usually pretty, well-fed females adorned with fruits, vegetables and grains that ripen at this time. Many cultures feature autumnal harvest festivals, often the most important on their calendars. Still extant echoes of these celebrations are found in the autumn Thanksgiving holiday of the United States and Canada, and the Jewish Sukkot holiday with its roots as a full-moon harvest festival of \"tabernacles\" (living in outdoor huts around the time of harvest). There are also the many North American Indian festivals tied to harvest of ripe foods gathered in the wild, the Chinese Mid-Autumn or Moon festival, and many others. The predominant mood of these autumnal celebrations is a gladness for the fruits of the earth mixed with a certain melancholy linked to the imminent arrival of harsh weather.\n\nThis view is presented in English poet John Keats' poem \"To Autumn\", where he describes the season as a time of bounteous fecundity, a time of 'mellow fruitfulness'.\n\nWhile most foods are harvested during the autumn, foods particularly associated with the season include pumpkins (which are integral parts of both Thanksgiving and Halloween) and apples, which are used to make the seasonal beverage apple cider.\n\nAutumn, especially in poetry, has often been associated with melancholia. The possibilities of summer are gone, and the chill of winter is on the horizon. Skies turn grey, the amount of usable daylight drops rapidly, and many people turn inward, both physically and mentally. It has been referred to as an unhealthy season.\n\nSimilar examples may be found in Irish poet William Butler Yeats' poem \"The Wild Swans at Coole\" where the maturing season that the poet observes symbolically represents his own ageing self. Like the natural world that he observes, he too has reached his prime and now must look forward to the inevitability of old age and death. French poet Paul Verlaine's \"\"Chanson d'automne\"\" (\"Autumn Song\") is likewise characterised by strong, painful feelings of sorrow. Keats' \"To Autumn\", written in September 1819, echoes this sense of melancholic reflection, but also emphasises the lush abundance of the season.\n\nAutumn is associated with Halloween (influenced by Samhain, a Celtic autumn festival), and with it a widespread marketing campaign that promotes it. Halloween is in autumn in the northern hemisphere. The television, film, book, costume, home decoration, and confectionery industries use this time of year to promote products closely associated with such a holiday, with promotions going from early September to 31 October, since their themes rapidly lose strength once the holiday ends, and advertising starts concentrating on Christmas.\n\nAutumn also has a strong association with the end of summer holiday and the start of a new school year, particularly for children in primary and secondary education. \"Back to School\" advertising and preparations usually occurs in the weeks leading to the beginning of autumn.\n\nEaster is in autumn in the southern hemisphere. \n\nThanksgiving Day is a national holiday celebrated in Canada, in the United States, in some of the Caribbean islands and in Liberia. Thanksgiving is celebrated on the second Monday of October in Canada and on the fourth Thursday of November in the United States, and around the same part of the year in other places. Similarly named festival holidays occur in Germany and Japan.\n\nTelevision stations and networks, particularly in North America, traditionally begin their regular seasons in autumn, with new series and new episodes of existing series debuting mostly during late September or early October (series that debut outside the fall season are usually known as mid-season replacements). A sweeps period takes place in November to measure Nielsen Ratings.\n\nAmerican football is played almost exclusively in the autumn months; at the high school level, seasons run through September and October, with some playoff games and holiday rivalry contests being played as late as Thanksgiving. College football's regular season runs from September through November, while the main professional circuit, the National Football League, plays from September through December. Summer sports, such as stock car racing and Major League Baseball, wrap up their seasons in early autumn; MLB's championship World Series is known popularly as the \"Fall Classic.\" (Amateur baseball is usually finished by August.) Likewise, professional winter sports, such as professional ice hockey, basketball and most leagues of soccer football in Europe, are in the early stages of their seasons during autumn; American college basketball and college ice hockey play teams outside their athletic conferences during the late autumn before their in-conference schedules begin in winter.\n\nThe Christian religious holidays of All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day are observed in autumn in the Northern hemisphere.\n\nSince 1997, Autumn has been one of the top 100 names for girls in the United States.\n\nIn Indian mythology, autumn is considered to be the preferred season for the goddess of learning Saraswati, who is also known by the name of \"goddess of autumn\" (Sharada).\n\nIn Asian mysticism, Autumn is associated with the element of metal, and subsequently with the colour white, the White Tiger of the West, and death and mourning.\n\nIn the United States, Labor Day is a public holiday celebrated on the first Monday in September.\n\nAlthough colour change in leaves occurs wherever deciduous trees are found, coloured autumn foliage is noted in various regions of the world: most of North America, Eastern Asia (including China, Korea, and Japan), Europe, the forest of Patagonia, eastern Australia and New Zealand's South Island.\n\nEastern Canada and New England are famous for their autumnal foliage, and this attracts major tourism (worth billions of US dollars) for the regions.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3052", "title": "Alameda, California", "text": "Alameda, California\n\nAlameda ( ; Spanish: ) is a city in Alameda County, California, United States. It is located on Alameda Island and Bay Farm Island, and is adjacent to and south of Oakland and east of San Francisco across the San Francisco Bay. Bay Farm Island, a portion of which is also known as \"Harbor Bay Isle\", is not actually an island, and is part of the mainland adjacent to the Oakland International Airport. The city's estimated 2017 population was 79,928. Alameda is a charter city, rather than a general law city, allowing the city to provide for any form of government. Alameda became a charter city and adopted a council–manager government in 1916, which it retains to the present.\n\nThe island Alameda occupies what was originally a peninsula connected to Oakland. Much of it was low-lying and marshy, but on higher ground than the peninsula and adjacent parts of what is now downtown Oakland were home to one of the largest coastal oak forests in the world. The area was therefore called \"Encinal\", Spanish for \"forest of evergreen oak\". \"Alameda\" is Spanish for \"grove of poplar trees\" or \"tree-lined avenue\", and was chosen in 1853 by popular vote.\n\nThe inhabitants at the time of the arrival of the Spanish in the late 18th century were a local band of the Ohlone tribe. The peninsula became part of the vast Rancho San Antonio granted in 1820 to Luis Peralta by the Spanish king who claimed California. The grant was later confirmed by the new Republic of Mexico upon its independence from Spain.\n\nOver time, the place became known as Bolsa de Encinal or Encinal de San Antonio.\n\nThe city was founded on June 6, 1853, and the town originally contained three small settlements. \"Alameda\" referred to the village at Encinal and High Streets, Hibbardsville was at the North Shore ferry and shipping terminal, and Woodstock was on the west near the ferry piers of the South Pacific Coast Railroad and the Central Pacific. Eventually, the Central Pacific's ferry pier became the Alameda Mole, featuring transit connections between San Francisco ferries, local trollies and Southern Pacific (formerly Central Pacific) commuter lines.\n\nThe first post office opened in 1854. The first school, Schmermerhorn School, was opened in 1855 (and eventually became Lincoln School), Encinal School was opened in 1860 (and closed in 1980). The San Francisco and Alameda Railroad opened the Encinal station in 1864. The Encinal area was also known as Fasskings Station in honor of Frederick Louis Fassking. Encinal's own post office opened in 1876, was renamed West End in 1877, and closed in 1891. The West End area was originally called Bowman's Point in honor of Charles G. Bowman, an early settler.\n\nThe Alameda Terminal was the site of the arrival of the first train via the First Transcontinental Railroad into the San Francisco Bay Area on September 6, 1869. The transcontinental terminus was switched to the Oakland Mole two months later, on November 8, 1869.\n\nThe borders of Alameda were made coextensive with the island in 1872, incorporating Woodstock into Alameda.\nMark Twain described Alameda as being \"The Garden of California.\" \n\nIn 1917, an attraction called Neptune Beach was built in the area now known as Crab Cove. Often compared to Coney Island, the park was a major attraction in the 1920s and 1930s. The original owners of the facility, the Strehlow family, partnered with a local confectioner to create tastes unique to Neptune Beach. Both the American snow cone and the popsicle were first sold at Neptune Beach. The Kewpie doll, hand-painted and dressed in unique hand-sewn dresses, became the original prize for winning games at the beach – another Neptune Beach invention. The Strehlows owned and operated the beach on their own, even filling in a section of the bay to add an additional Olympic-size swimming pool and an exceptional roller coaster which must have given riders a tremendous view of the bay. The \"Cottage Baths\" were available for rent.\n\nNeptune Beach's two huge outdoor pools hosted swimming races and exhibitions by such famous swimmers as Olympian Johnny Weissmuller, who later starred as the original Tarzan, and Jack LaLanne, who started a chain of health clubs. The park closed down in 1939 because of the Great Depression, the completion of the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge, people circumventing paying the admission price, and the rise of car culture. Once the Bay Bridge was complete, the rail lines, which ran right past the entrance to Neptune Beach on the way to the Alameda Mole and the Ferry, lost riders in droves. People began using their cars to escape the city and the immediate suburbs like Alameda and traveling further afield in California. Alameda lost its resort status as more distant locations became more attractive to cash-rich San Francisco tourists. Youngsters in town became aware of ways to avoid paying the dime for admission to the park. Strong swimmers or even waders could sneak in on the bay side just by swimming around the fence.\n\nSome of the resort homes and buildings from the Neptune beach era still exist in present-day Alameda. The Croll Building, on the corner of Webster Street and Central Avenue, was the site of Croll's Gardens and Hotel, famous as training quarters for some of the greatest fighters in boxing history from 1883 to 1914. James J. Corbett, Bob Fitzsimmons, Jim Jefferies, Jack Johnson, and many other champions all stayed and trained here. Today this beautifully preserved building is home to Croll's Pizza and the 1400 Bar & Grill Restaurant. Neptune Court, just a block away on the corner of Central Ave. and McKay Ave., provides another glimpse of what resort life was like in Alameda in the 1920s. A short walk near Crab Cove will reveal many more historic gems.\n\nThe vast majority of the Neptune Beach structures – the hand-carved carousel from the world-famed Dentzel Company, the Ferris wheel, the roller coaster, and other rides – were auctioned off in 1940 for mere pennies on the dollar of their original cost. Today, A consequence of the Neptune Beach closing around 1940 was a total dearth of quality, clean swimming facilities in town. A grass roots effort to create swimming pools at two high schools and two city parks would continue into the early 1960s.\n\nWhen the railroad came to town in the 1860s Park Street developed into the major thoroughfare of the city and the location of the main Alameda train station, residents of Old Alameda pulled up stakes and moved across town to the new downtown. The street's location was chosen by two landowners who wished to attract tenants and development to their land. As a result, they designated their mutual property line as Park Street.\n\nIn 1902, the need for expanded shipping facilities led to the dredging of a canal through the marshland between Oakland and Alameda, turning Alameda into an island. Most of the soil from the canal was used to fill in nearby marshland. The area of Alameda called Bay Farm Island is no longer an island, but is attached by fill to Oakland. In his youth, author Jack London was known to take part in oyster pirating in the highly productive oyster beds near Bay Farm Island, today long gone. The Alameda Works Shipyard was one of the largest and best equipped shipyards in the country. In the 1950s, Alameda's industrial and ship building industries thrived along the Alameda Estuary, where the world's first-ever, land-based, containerized shipping crane was used. Currently, the Port of Oakland across the estuary serves as one of the largest ports on the West Coast, using the shipping technologies originally experimented with in Alameda. As of March 21, 2006, Alameda is a \"Coast Guard City\", one of seven in the country.\n\nIn addition to the regular trains running to the Alameda Mole, Alameda was also served by local steam commuter lines of the Southern Pacific (initially, the Central Pacific) which were later transformed into the East Bay Electric Lines. Southern Pacific's electrified trains were not streetcars, but full-sized railroad cars which connected to the mainland by bridges at Webster Street and Fruitvale (only the latter bridge survives today). The trains ran to both the Oakland Mole and the Alameda Mole. In fact, one line which ran between the two moles was dubbed the \"Horseshoe Line\" for the shape of the route on a map. Soon after the completion of the Bay Bridge, Alameda trains ran directly to San Francisco on the lower deck of the bridge, the ferries having been rendered unnecessary. Alameda was the site of the Southern Pacific's West Alameda Shops where all the electric trains were maintained and repaired.\n\nIn the 1930s Pan American Airways established a seaplane port along the fill that led to the Alameda Mole. This was the original home base for the famous China Clipper flying boat.\nIn 1929, the University of California established the San Francisco Airdrome located near the current Webster Street tube as a public airport. The Bay Airdrome had its gala christening party in 1930. The airfield was a busy place, as an early home base for Coastal Air Freight, Varney Air Lines, West Coast Air Transport, Western Air Express, the transbay Air Ferries, and Boeing's Pacific Air Transport. The Airdrome was closed in 1941 when its air traffic interfered with the newly built Naval Air Station Alameda (NAS Alameda). With the advent of World War II, a vast stretch of the marshy area southwest of the Alameda Mole was filled and the NAS Alameda established. This major Naval facility included a large airfield, as well as docks for several aircraft carriers. It closed in 1997.\n\nIn the late 1950s the Utah Construction Company began a landfill beyond the \"Old Sea Wall\" and created \"South Shore\".\n\nOn February 7, 1973, a USN Vought A-7E Corsair II fighter jet on a routine training mission from Lemoore Naval Air Station, suddenly caught fire, 28,000 feet over the San Francisco Bay and crashed into the Tahoe Apartments in Alameda. Eleven people, including pilot Lieutenant Robert Lee Ward died in the crash and fire.\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (53.79%) is water.\n\nAlthough Alameda's nickname is \"The Island City\" (or simply \"the island\"), the current city occupies two islands as well as a small section of the mainland. Today, the city consists of the main original section, with the former Naval Air Station Alameda (NAS Alameda) at the west end of Alameda Island, Southshore along the southern side of Alameda Island, and Bay Farm Island, which is part of the mainland proper. The area of the former NAS is now known as \"Alameda Point.\" The Southshore area is separated from the main part of Alameda Island by a lagoon; the north shore of the lagoon is located approximately where the original south shore of the island was. Alameda Point and Southshore are built on bay fill.\n\nNot all of Alameda Island is part of the City of Alameda. Although nearly all of the island is in Alameda city limits, a small portion of a dump site west of the former runways at Alameda Point extends far enough into San Francisco Bay that it is over the county line and part of the City and County of San Francisco. \n\nCoast Guard Island, a small island between Alameda Island and Oakland, is also part of Alameda and is the home of Integrated Support Command Alameda\n\nThis region experiences warm (but not hot) and dry summers, with no average monthly temperatures above 71.6 °F. According to the Köppen climate classification system, Alameda has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate, abbreviated \"Csb\" on climate maps. Annual precipitation is about 20 inches, all rain (snow is extremely rare at sea level in the San Francisco Bay area).\n\nThe 2010 United States Census reported that Alameda had a population of 73,812. (2015 census estimates place the population at 78,630) \n\nThe population density was 3,214.9 people per square mile (1,241.3/km²). The racial makeup of Alameda was 37,460 (50.8%) White, 23,058 (31.2%) Asian, 4,759 (6.4%) African American, 426 (0.6%) Native American, 381 (0.5%) Pacific Islander, 2,463 (3.3%) from other races, and 5,265 (7.1%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8,092 persons (11.0%).\n\nThe Census reported that 72,316 people (98.0% of the population) lived in households, 857 (1.2%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 639 (0.9%) were institutionalized.\n\nThere were 30,123 households, out of which 9,144 (30.4%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 13,440 (44.6%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 3,623 (12.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,228 (4.1%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 1,681 (5.6%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 459 (1.5%) same-sex married couples or same-sex partnerships. 9,347 households (31.0%) were made up of individuals and 2,874 (9.5%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40. There were 18,291 families (60.7% of all households); the average family size was 3.06.\n\nThe age distribution of the population shows 15,304 people (20.7%) under the age of 18, 5,489 people (7.4%) aged 18 to 24, 21,000 people (28.5%) aged 25 to 44, 22,044 people (29.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 9,975 people (13.5%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.7 years. For every 100 females there were 91.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.5 males.\n\nPer capita money income in past 12 months (2013 dollars), 2009 – 2013 was $41,340.00 per US Census. Median household income, 2009 – 2013 was $74,606.00 per US Census.\n\nThere were 32,351 housing units at an average density of 1,409.0 per square mile (544.0/km²), of which 14,488 (48.1%) were owner-occupied, and 15,635 (51.9%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.1%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.7%. 37,042 people (50.2% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 35,274 people (47.8%) lived in rental housing units.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 72,259 people, 30,226 households, and 17,863 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,583.3/km² (6,693.4/mi²). There were 31,644 housing units at an average density of 1,131.3/km² (2,931.2/mi²). The racial makeup of the city was 56.95% White, 6.21% Black or African American, 0.67% Native American, 26.15% Asian, 0.60% Pacific Islander, 3.29% from other races, and 6.13% from two or more races. 9.31% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n\nThere were 30,226 households out of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.7% were married couples living together, 11.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.9% were non-families. 32.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 3.04.\n\nIn the city, the age distribution of the population shows 21.5% under the age of 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 33.6% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.5 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $56,285, and the median income for a family was $68,625. Males had a median income of $49,174 versus $40,165 for females. The per capita income for the city was $30,982. About 6.0% of families and 8.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.4% of those under age 18 and 6.1% of those age 65 or over.\n\nThere is a large Filipino community; and also a major Portuguese community, from which Tom Hanks' mother came and where Lyndsy Fonseca was raised for some time. Alameda also has a historic Japanese American community and had a small Japanese business district on a portion of Park Street prior to World War II, when the city's Japanese population was interned. A Japanese Buddhist church is one of the few remaining buildings left of Alameda's pre-war Japanese American community.\n\nLike much of the heavily Democratic Alameda County, the City of Alameda is considered a liberal city. In addition to voting solidly for Democratic candidates in statewide elections, voters in the city have approved a number of progressive ballot initiatives.\n\nVehicle access to Alameda Island is via three bridges from Oakland (Park Street, Fruitvale Avenue, and High Street Bridges), as well as the two one-way Posey and Webster Street Tubes leading into Oakland's Chinatown. Connections from Alameda to Bay Farm Island is provided via the Bay Farm Island Bridge for vehicular traffic as well as the Bay Farm Island Bicycle Bridge (the only pedestrian/bicycle-only drawbridge in the United States). California State Route 61 runs down city streets from the Posey and Webster Street Tubes, across the Bay Farm Island Bridge, and south to the Oakland Airport.\n\nPublic transportation includes the AC Transit buses (which include express buses to San Francisco) and two ferry services — the Alameda/Oakland Ferry and the Alameda Harbor Bay Ferry. AC Transit buses also cover 3 bus times in the morning and afternoon to Lincoln Middle School, located in Alameda. Both ferry services may soon be transferred to the Water Transit Authority. The closest BART stations are Lake Merritt and 12th Street, near the exit to the Posey Tube, and Fruitvale, near the Fruitvale Bridge.\n\nEven though the island is just minutes off Interstate 880 in Oakland, the speed limit for the city is 25 mph (40 km/h) on almost every road. Many unaware drivers fail to slow down after exiting the highway. Groups like Pedestrian Friendly Alameda and BikeAlameda advocate stronger enforcement of speeding laws.\n\nAlameda has also featured prominently on automotive blog Jalopnik, with their \"Down on The Street\" segment consisting of cars found on the streets of Alameda. Jalopnik has nicknamed it \"The Island That Rust Forgot\".\n\nDue to its proximity to the Bay, wind surfers and kite surfers can often be seen at Robert W. Crown Memorial State Beach. From the beach there are also views of the San Francisco skyline and the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge.\n\nThe aircraft carrier \"USS \"Hornet\", a museum ship, has been moored at the former Naval Air Station as the USS \"Hornet\" Museum since 1998. This ship was originally named the \"USS Kearsarge\", but was renamed in honor of the previous Hornet CV-8 (famous for the Doolittle raid), which was lost in October 1942.\n\nAlameda is known for its Victorian houses; 9% of all single-family houses (1500) in Alameda are Victorian, and many more have been divided into two to four-unit dwellings. It is said that Alameda has more pre-1906 earthquake era homes in the Gold Coast section than any other city in the Bay Area.\n\nAlameda is home to the official offices and training facility of the Oakland Raiders American football team, which is located on Bay Farm Island. The facility is also home to The Raider Image, the merchandise arm of the franchise, which the public can visit.\n\nAt the turn of the 19th century, the city of Alameda took a large chunk of Charles Froling's land away to build a street. Froling had planned to build his dream house on the plot of land he received through inheritance. To spite the city and an unsympathetic neighbor, Froling built a house wide, long and high on the tiny strip of land left to him. The Froling spite house is still standing and occupied.\n\nAlameda is also known for its Fourth of July parade, which is advertised as the second oldest and second longest Fourth of July parade in the United States. It features homemade floats, classic cars, motorized living room furniture, fire-breathing dragons, marching bands, and large crowds. The parade route is about 3 miles (5 km) long.\n\nThe Historic Park Street Business District is known for its many buildings that date back to the 1800s and is a designated Historic Commercial District on the National Register. This main thoroughfare of downtown Alameda Is filled with local shops, restaurants, drinking establishments, and services. The renovated 1932 Alameda Theatre & Cineplex is the cultural centerpiece of the commercial district. In addition, popular attractions include High Scores Arcade Museum (a retro video game arcade) and Subpar Miniature Golf (an indoor miniature golf complex that features Bay Area landmarks such as the Golden Gate Bridge and Coit Tower at each hole).\n\nNaval Air Station Alameda (NAS), at Alameda Point, which was decommissioned in 1997, has been turned over to the City of Alameda for civilian development. The area of the former NAS is now known as Alameda Point. In late July 2006, the City of Alameda announced a deal with the Navy that would turn the land over to the city for $108M. The transfer process was initially slowed down by disputes between the Navy and the city regarding payment for environmental cleanup of the land.\n\nIn September 2010 the US Veterans Administration proposed construction of a $209 million state-of-the-art facility at Alameda Point that would provide primary care, specialty care, and mental health, substance abuse and other services. The VA received Congressional $17.33 million in budget authority for the project in 2011. But concerns over the proximity to a nesting site for an endangered bird, the California least tern, have led to delays in moving the project forward. The VA's 2012 and 2013 budget requests to Congress contain no funding requests for Alameda Point. \n\nIn September 2011 Alameda and the Navy reached an agreement on the terms of a no-cost conveyance for the entire 918 acres at Alameda Point.\n\nThe 33rd America's Cup Race was won by Golden Gate Yacht Club racing team BMW Oracle, founded by Larry Ellison. One possible use of the air station would be an alternate or partnered site with San Francisco for 34th America's Cup.\nWithin 2 weeks of the Golden Gate Yacht Club winning the America's Cup, Alameda city council with local support sent a unanimous letter of support to hold AC 34 in San Francisco Bay Area.\nIn early 2011, the City Council created an ad hoc America's Cup Citizens Advisory Committee to look for ways that Alameda could draw interest from teams and potential spectators. Through those efforts, in mid-2012, the Swedish Artemis Racing team announced that they would create their team base in one of the former air station hangars on Alameda Point.\n\nRosenblum Cellars Winery, Rock Wall Winery, Building 43 Winery, Hangar 1, and St. George Spirits are located at Alameda Point. In 1978, Alameda veterinarian Kent Rosenblum and his wife Kathy founded Rosenblum Cellars. In 2008, the company was purchased by Diageo Estates. Shauna Rosenblum, daughter of Kent and Kathy, is the wine maker for Rock Wall Winery. In December, 2007, St. George Absinthe Verte, produced by St. George Spirits became the first brand of American-made absinthe to be legally produced in the United States since a ban was enacted in 1912.\n\nThe city restored the historic Art Deco city landmark Alameda Theatre, expanding it to include a theater multiplex. The public opening was May 21, 2008.\n\nThe South Shore Mall Twin Cinema opened in 1969 and served as a prominent theater on the island until its closure in 1998. In 2002, the building was demolished and its former site is now a parking lot.\n\nAlameda also hosts the Altarena Playhouse, which since 1957 has been home to the Bay Area's oldest continuously operating community theater organization.\n\nAccording to the City's 2016 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\n\nAlameda's first newspaper, the \"Encinal\", appeared in the early 1850s and the paper's editor was instrumental in the movement to incorporate the city. Following the \"Encinal\", several other papers appeared along geographic lines, and the \"Daily Argus\" eventually rose to prominence. A young Alameda native, Joseph R. Knowland, wrote political and historical articles for the Alameda papers. Later, Knowland owned the powerful \"Oakland Tribune\". Around 1900, the \"Daily Argus\" began to fade in importance and east and west papers \"The Times\" and \"The Star\" combined to take the leading role as the \"Alameda Times-Star\" in the 1930s. The \"Times-Star\" was sold to the Alameda Newspaper Group in the 1970s.\n\nIn 1997, the Hills Newspaper chain was bought by Knight Ridder, at the time, the second-largest newspaper chain in the U.S. Following the buyout, former Hills Newspapers employees recognized the lack of a local community voice in Alameda, and again formed a new locally based newspaper, the \"Alameda Sun\", in 2001. In 2006, Knight Ridder announced its impending sale to McClatchy Corp., a Sacramento-based publishing firm. McClatchy Corp. has put the \"Contra Costa Times\", which under the Knight Ridder reorganization included all five of the original Hills Newspapers, up for sale. The current owners of the \"Alameda Times-Star\", MediaNews, Inc., based in Colorado, have announced a strong interest in buying both the \"Contra Costa Times\" chain and the \"San Jose Mercury News\", consolidating the daily newspaper market of the East Bay, effectively under one owner. MediaNews closed the \"Times-Star\" in 2011.\n\nThe Alameda community is currently served by two weekly newspapers, the Alameda Journal, owned by the MediaNews Group, and the Alameda Sun, along with news websites, The Alamedan, Action Alameda News.\n\nAfter two previous failures, voters in the city passed a ballot measure in 2000 authorizing a bond measure for construction of a new library to replace the city's Carnegie library, damaged during the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake. The city also received state funds for the new library and opened the doors to the new facility in November 2006.\n\nThere is a library branch on Bay Farm Island and another at Santa Clara and Eighth Avenue.\n\nFounded in 1894, Alameda Hospital is located at Clinton Avenue and Willow Street.\n\nUnlike surrounding communities, Alameda has a municipal power service, Alameda Municipal Power (AMP), that delivers services directly to consumers. AMP sold the majority of its telecommunications business to Comcast in 2008 but continues to provide telecommunication service at Alameda Point.\n\nDuring the California electricity crisis of 2000 and 2001, Alameda Municipal Power did not raise electricity rates, while residents in most of the state endured significant price increases.\n\nThe Alameda Arts Council (AAC) serves as the local Alameda City arts council. The Alameda Civic Ballet is the ballet troupe of the city. The Alameda Museum features displays on the history of Alameda. The Alameda Art Association has about 80 members as of January 2011, and has a gallery space at South Shore Center mall. The Association began in 1944. An annual benefit, Circus for Arts in the Schools, was started by clown artist Jeff Raz in 2004. Photo-realist Robert Bechtle has painted numerous Alameda subjects, including \"Alameda Gran Torino\", which was acquired by SFMOMA in 1974 and remains one of Bechtle's most famous works.\n\nAlameda has been home to many movie sets. Some of the movies filmed on the island have included \"Bicentennial Man\", \"The Net\", \"The Matrix Reloaded\", \"The Matrix Revolutions\", \"Bee Season\", the original 1968 \"Your, Mine and Ours\" and the movie musical \"Rent\". Parts of Alameda High School were animated for the \"Animatrix\" episode \"Kid's Story\". A massive hangar at the former Naval Air Station Alameda was used to film special scenes requiring computer-generated imagery for movies such as \"Bicentennial Man\", \"Flubber\", \"What Dreams May Come\", \"\" and many scenes from the \"Matrix\" trilogy, including the signature bullet time scene. The open space of the decommissioned naval base often hosts \"MythBusters\"' more dangerous experiments. The movie \"Spirit Of '76\" was filmed all throughout Alameda.\n\nThe documentary, \"Shallow Waters: The Public Death of Raymond Zack\" was filmed at Alameda locations, and chronicled the 2011 Death of Raymond Zack on Crown Beach in Alameda. The film was screened in 2016 at the Michaan Auction House Theater in Alameda.\n\nThe USS Hornet Museum, permanently moored at Alameda Point, has been the site for scenes used in major theatrical releases: \"\", \"Rescue Dawn\", and \"The Master\". In addition, the aircraft carrier has been used for television shows such as \"JAG\", \"Carrier\", \"Looking\", \"The Great Escape\", and the special military episode of \"Fear Factor\"; plus a number of television commercials.\n\nThe Altarena Playhouse, which performs comedies, dramas and musicals, was founded in 1938 and is the longest continuously operating community theater in the San Francisco Bay Area.\n\nRhythmix Cultural Works (RCW) brings people of all ages together to experience and explore music, dance, visual art and educational opportunities. RCW's programs are housed in a restored industrial waterfront building that speaks to Alameda’s history while creating an inclusive venue that reflects the Bay Area’s rich diversity. The organization offers an array of arts programming to the community including Island Arts, Island City Waterways, Round the World Festival and its Performance Art and Learning program (PAL) that serves more than 2000 youth with free cultural arts assemblies each year.\n\nWebster Street in Alameda has long been the host of many arts, crafts and holiday festivals. During some of these festivals, the Chamber of Commerce along with the West Alameda Business Association (WABA) will block of a portion of Webster St. for the entertainment of festival goers. Festivals such as The Island JAM formerly known as the Peanut Butter Jam Festival brings a lot of local and outside visitors. Other event on the \"West-End\" include Trick-or-Treat on Webster Street where merchants supply goodies for local children and culminates with a parade and costume contest; in December \"Santa Claus Meet-n-Greet on Webster Street\" happens with elves, and a photo with the big guy.\n\nThere are three major events when the street in Alameda's historic downtown district is closed to vehicular traffic. The \"Park Street Spring Festival\" takes place every May during the weekend of Mother's Day and attracts over 50,000 visitors. The \"Park Street Art & Wine Faire\" takes place the last weekend of every July and attracts over 100,000 visitors. Both street fairs feature over 150 arts & crafts vendors, food vendors, beer and wine pouring, a children's area, and two stages with regional entertainment. The \"Park Street Classic Car Show\" is held on the second Saturday every October and displays over 400 vintage vehicles.\n\n\nPublic primary and secondary education in Alameda is the responsibility of the Alameda Unified School District, which is legally separate from the City of Alameda government (as is common throughout California). The College of Alameda, a two-year community college in the West End is part of the Peralta Community College District. The city has numerous private primary schools, and one private high school, St. Joseph Notre Dame High School, a Catholic school.\n\nAlameda's relationships with Wuxi and Jiangyin were initiated in 2005, in part, by Stewart Chen, who then served on the City of Alameda Social Service and Human Relations board, and who went on to be elected to Alameda City Council in November, 2012.\n\nWuxi, China, is a so-called friendship city, because the diplomacy organization Sister Cities International does not recognize the relationship.\n\n\n\nIn September, 2013, a Tibetan rights group initiated a social media and e-mail campaign targeting the Mayor of Alameda, complaining that City of Alameda's participation in, and association with, a flag-raising ceremony to recognize National Day of the People's Republic of China on October 1 was tantamount to endorsing the communist regime in China, its human rights abuses, and the occupation of Tibet. The City of Alameda responded that the ceremony was a function of the Alameda Sister City Association and the Alameda Wuxi Friendship Committee, not a function of the City of Alameda. The Tibetan rights group responded that on September 26, the City of Alameda Social Service and Human Relations board appointed a member, Michael Robles-Wong, as a representative to the Sister City Association.\n\nOn October 1, 2013, the Tibetan rights groupsTibetTruth and Bay Area Friends of Tibet sent roughly 75 protesters to Alameda City Hall to protest the ceremony, which organizers ultimately canceled before it began. Former City of Alameda Councilmember Frank Matarrese announced the cancellation. Then-city councilmember Stewart Chen subsequently defended the ceremony, as a diplomatic, not political, exercise.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3054", "title": "Alpha helix", "text": "Alpha helix\n\nThe Alpha Helix (α-helix) is a common motif in the secondary structure of proteins and is a righthand-spiral conformation (i.e. helix) in which every backbone N−H group donates a hydrogen bond to the backbone C=O group of the amino acid located three or four residues earlier along the protein sequence. \n\nAlpha Helix is also called a classic Pauling–Corey–Branson α-helix. The name 3.6-helix is also used for this type of helix, denoting the average number of residues per helical turn, with 13 atoms being involved in the ring formed by the hydrogen bond. \n\nAmong types of local structure in proteins, the α-helix is the most regular and the most predictable from sequence, as well as the most prevalent.\n\nIn the early 1930s, William Astbury showed that there were drastic changes in the X-ray fiber diffraction of moist wool or hair fibers upon significant stretching. The data suggested that the unstretched fibers had a coiled molecular structure with a characteristic repeat of ~.\n\nAstbury initially proposed a kinked-chain structure for the fibers. He later joined other researchers (notably the American chemist Maurice Huggins) in proposing that:\n\nAlthough incorrect in their details, Astbury's models of these forms were correct in essence and correspond to modern elements of secondary structure, the α-helix and the β-strand (Astbury's nomenclature was kept), which were developed by Linus Pauling, Robert Corey and Herman Branson in 1951 (see below); that paper showed both right- and left-handed helices, although in 1960 the crystal structure of myoglobin showed that the right-handed form is the common one. Hans Neurath was the first to show that Astbury's models could not be correct in detail, because they involved clashes of atoms. Neurath's paper and Astbury's data inspired H. S. Taylor, Maurice Huggins and Bragg and collaborators to propose models of keratin that somewhat resemble the modern α-helix.\n\nTwo key developments in the modeling of the modern α-helix were: the correct bond geometry, thanks to the crystal structure determinations of amino acids and peptides and Pauling's prediction of \"planar\" peptide bonds; and his relinquishing of the assumption of an integral number of residues per turn of the helix. The pivotal moment came in the early spring of 1948, when Pauling caught a cold and went to bed. Being bored, he drew a polypeptide chain of roughly correct dimensions on a strip of paper and folded it into a helix, being careful to maintain the planar peptide bonds. After a few attempts, he produced a model with physically plausible hydrogen bonds. Pauling then worked with Corey and Branson to confirm his model before publication. In 1954, Pauling was awarded his first Nobel Prize \"for his research into the nature of the chemical bond and its application to the elucidation of the structure of complex substances\" (such as proteins), prominently including the structure of the α-helix.\n\nThe amino acids in an α-helix are arranged in a right-handed helical structure where each amino acid residue corresponds to a 100° turn in the helix (i.e., the helix has 3.6 residues per turn), and a translation of along the helical axis. Dunitz describes how Pauling's first article on the theme in fact shows a left-handed helix, the enantiomer of the true structure. Short pieces of left-handed helix sometimes occur with a large content of achiral glycine amino acids, but are unfavorable for the other normal, biological -amino acids. The pitch of the alpha-helix (the vertical distance between consecutive turns of the helix) is , which is the product of 1.5 and 3.6. What is most important is that the N-H group of an amino acid forms a hydrogen bond with the C=O group of the amino acid \"four\" residues earlier; this repeated \"i\" + 4 → \"i\" hydrogen bonding is the most prominent characteristic of an α-helix. Official international nomenclature specifies two ways of defining α-helices, rule 6.2 in terms of repeating \"φ\", \"ψ\" torsion angles (see below) and rule 6.3 in terms of the combined pattern of pitch and hydrogen bonding. The α-helices can be identified in protein structure using several computational methods, one of which being DSSP (Dictionary of Protein Secondary Structure).\nSimilar structures include the 3 helix (\"i\" + 3 → \"i\" hydrogen bonding) and the π-helix (\"i\" + 5 → \"i\" hydrogen bonding). The α-helix can be described as a 3.6 helix, since the \"i\" + 4 spacing adds three more atoms to the H-bonded loop compared to the tighter 3 helix, and on average, 3.6 amino acids are involved in one ring of α-helix. The subscripts refer to the number of atoms (including the hydrogen) in the closed loop formed by the hydrogen bond.\nResidues in α-helices typically adopt backbone (\"φ\", \"ψ\") dihedral angles around (−60°, −45°), as shown in the image at right. In more general terms, they adopt dihedral angles such that the \"ψ\" dihedral angle of one residue and the \"φ\" dihedral angle of the \"next\" residue sum to roughly −105°. As a consequence, α-helical dihedral angles, in general, fall on a diagonal stripe on the Ramachandran diagram (of slope −1), ranging from (−90°, −15°) to (−35°, −70°). For comparison, the sum of the dihedral angles for a 3 helix is roughly −75°, whereas that for the π-helix is roughly −130°. The general formula for the rotation angle \"Ω\" per residue of any polypeptide helix with \"trans\" isomers is given by the equation\n\nThe α-helix is tightly packed; there is almost no free space within the helix. The amino-acid side-chains are on the outside of the helix, and point roughly \"downward\" (i.e., toward the N-terminus), like the branches of an evergreen tree (Christmas tree effect). This directionality is sometimes used in preliminary, low-resolution electron-density maps to determine the direction of the protein backbone.\n\nThree differently arranged styles of 2D diagrams are used to represent different aspects of the sequence and structure relationships that confer specific physical and interaction properties on individual α-helices. Two of these emphasize circular placement around the cylindrical cross-section: The first-developed such diagram is called the \"helical wheel\", and a more recent version is called the \"wenxiang diagram\". The latter name came from the fact that it resembles a coil-like incense used in China to repel mosquitos ().\n\nThe helical wheel represents a helix by a projection of the C backbone structure down the helix axis, while the wenxiang diagram represents it more abstractly as a smooth spiral coiled on the plane of the page. Both label the sequence with one-letter amino-acid code (see amino acid) at each C position, using different colors or symbols to code the amino-acid properties. Hydrophobic vs hydrophilic amino acids are always distinguished, as the most important property governing helix interactions. Sometimes positively vs negatively charged hydrophilics are distinguished, and sometimes ambiguous amino acids such as glycine (G) are distinguished. Color-coding conventions are various. The helical wheel does not change representation along the helix, while the wenxiang diagram is able to show the relative locations of the amino acids in an α-helix regardless of how long it is.\n\nEither circular style of diagram can provide an intuitive and easily visualizable 2D picture that characterizes the disposition of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues in α-helices, and can be used to study helix–helix interactions, helix-membrane interactions as quantified by the helical hydrophobic moment, or protein-protein interactions.\n\nVarious utilities and web sites are available to generate helical wheels, such as the page by Kael Fischer.\n\nThe third style of 2D diagram is called a \"helical net\". It is generated by opening the cylindrical surface of each helix along a line parallel to the axis and laying the result out vertically. The helix net is not suitable for studying helix–helix packing interactions, but it has become the dominant means of representing the sequence arrangement for integral membrane proteins because it shows important relationships of the helical sequence to vertical positioning within the membrane even without knowledge of how the helices are arranged in 3D.\n\nHelices observed in proteins can range from four to over forty residues long, but a typical helix contains about ten amino acids (about three turns). In general, short polypeptides do not exhibit much α-helical structure in solution, since the entropic cost associated with the folding of the polypeptide chain is not compensated for by a sufficient amount of stabilizing interactions. In general, the backbone hydrogen bonds of α-helices are considered slightly weaker than those found in β-sheets, and are readily attacked by the ambient water molecules. However, in more hydrophobic environments such as the plasma membrane, or in the presence of co-solvents such as trifluoroethanol (TFE), or isolated from solvent in the gas phase, oligopeptides readily adopt stable α-helical structure. Furthermore, crosslinks can be incorporated into peptides to conformationally stabilize helical folds. Crosslinks stabilize the helical state by entropically destabilizing the unfolded state and by removing enthalpically stabilized \"decoy\" folds that compete with the fully helical state. It has been shown that α-helices are more stable, robust to mutations and designable than β-strands in natural proteins, and also in artificial designed proteins. \n\nSince the α-helix is defined by its hydrogen bonds and backbone conformation, the most detailed experimental evidence for α-helical structure comes from atomic-resolution X-ray crystallography such as the example shown at right. It is clear that all the backbone carbonyl oxygens point downward (toward the C-terminus) but splay out slightly, and the H-bonds are approximately parallel to the helix axis. Protein structures from NMR spectroscopy also show helices well, with characteristic observations of nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) couplings between atoms on adjacent helical turns. In some cases, the individual hydrogen bonds can be observed directly as a small scalar coupling in NMR.\n\nThere are several lower-resolution methods for assigning general helical structure. The NMR chemical shifts (in particular of the C, C and C′) and residual dipolar couplings are often characteristic of helices. The far-UV (170–250 nm) circular dichroism spectrum of helices is also idiosyncratic, exhibiting a pronounced double minimum at around 208 and 222 nm. Infrared spectroscopy is rarely used, since the α-helical spectrum resembles that of a random coil (although these might be discerned by, e.g., hydrogen-deuterium exchange). Finally, cryo electron microscopy is now capable of discerning individual α-helices within a protein, although their assignment to residues is still an active area of research.\n\nLong homopolymers of amino acids often form helices if soluble. Such long, isolated helices can also be detected by other methods, such as dielectric relaxation, flow birefringence, and measurements of the diffusion constant. In stricter terms, these methods detect only the characteristic prolate (long cigar-like) hydrodynamic shape of a helix, or its large dipole moment.\n\nDifferent amino-acid sequences have different propensities for forming α-helical structure. Methionine, alanine, leucine, glutamate, and lysine uncharged (\"MALEK\" in the amino-acid 1-letter codes) all have especially high helix-forming propensities, whereas proline and glycine have poor helix-forming propensities. Proline either breaks or kinks a helix, both because it cannot donate an amide hydrogen bond (having no amide hydrogen), and also because its sidechain interferes sterically with the backbone of the preceding turn – inside a helix, this forces a bend of about 30° in the helix's axis. However, proline is often seen as the \"first\" residue of a helix, it is presumed due to its structural rigidity. At the other extreme, glycine also tends to disrupt helices because its high conformational flexibility makes it entropically expensive to adopt the relatively constrained α-helical structure.\n\nEstimated differences in free energy, Δ(Δ\"G\"), estimated in kcal/mol per residue in an α-helical configuration, relative to alanine arbitrarily set as zero. Higher numbers (more positive free energies) are less favoured. Significant deviations from these average numbers are possible, depending on the identities of the neighbouring residues.\n\nA helix has an overall dipole moment due to the aggregate effect of the individual microdipoles from the carbonyl groups of the peptide bond pointing along the helix axis. The effects of this macrodipole are a matter of some controversy. α-helices often occur with the N-terminal end bound by a negatively charged group, sometimes an amino acid side chain such as glutamate or aspartate, or sometimes a phosphate ion. Some regard the helix macrodipole as interacting electrostatically with such groups. Others feel that this is misleading and it is more realistic to say that the hydrogen bond potential of the free NH groups at the N-terminus of an α-helix can be satisfied by hydrogen bonding; this can also be regarded as set of interactions between local microdipoles such as .\n\nCoiled-coil α helices are highly stable forms in which two or more helices wrap around each other in a \"supercoil\" structure. Coiled coils contain a highly characteristic sequence motif known as a heptad repeat, in which the motif repeats itself every seven residues along the sequence (\"amino acid\" residues, not DNA base-pairs). The first and especially the fourth residues (known as the \"a\" and \"d\" positions) are almost always hydrophobic; the fourth residue is typically leucine - this gives rise to the name of the structural motif called a \"leucine zipper\", which is a type of coiled-coil. These hydrophobic residues pack together in the interior of the helix bundle. In general, the fifth and seventh residues (the \"e\" and \"g\" positions) have opposing charges and form a salt bridge stabilized by electrostatic interactions. Fibrous proteins such as keratin or the \"stalks\" of myosin or kinesin often adopt coiled-coil structures, as do several dimerizing proteins. A pair of coiled-coils – a four-helix bundle – is a very common structural motif in proteins. For example, it occurs in human growth hormone and several varieties of cytochrome. The Rop protein, which promotes plasmid replication in bacteria, is an interesting case in which a single polypeptide forms a coiled-coil and two monomers assemble to form a four-helix bundle.\n\nThe amino acids that make up a particular helix can be plotted on a helical wheel, a representation that illustrates the orientations of the constituent amino acids (see the article for leucine zipper for such a diagram). Often in globular proteins, as well as in specialized structures such as coiled-coils and leucine zippers, an α-helix will exhibit two \"faces\" – one containing predominantly hydrophobic amino acids oriented toward the interior of the protein, in the hydrophobic core, and one containing predominantly polar amino acids oriented toward the solvent-exposed surface of the protein.\n\nMyoglobin and hemoglobin, the first two proteins whose structures were solved by X-ray crystallography, have very similar folds made up of about 70% α-helix, with the rest being non-repetitive regions, or \"loops\" that connect the helices. In classifying proteins by their dominant fold, the Structural Classification of Proteins database maintains a large category specifically for all-α proteins.\n\nHemoglobin then has an even larger-scale quaternary structure, in which the functional oxygen-binding molecule is made up of four subunits.\n\nα-Helices have particular significance in DNA binding motifs, including helix-turn-helix motifs, leucine zipper motifs and zinc finger motifs. This is because of the convenient structural fact that the diameter of an α-helix is about including an average set of sidechains, about the same as the width of the major groove in B-form DNA, and also because coiled-coil (or leucine zipper) dimers of helices can readily position a pair of interaction surfaces to contact the sort of symmetrical repeat common in double-helical DNA. An example of both aspects is the transcription factor Max (see image at left), which uses a helical coiled coil to dimerize, positioning another pair of helices for interaction in two successive turns of the DNA major groove.\n\nα-Helices are also the most common protein structure element that crosses biological membranes (transmembrane protein) it is presumed because the helical structure can satisfy all backbone hydrogen-bonds internally, leaving no polar groups exposed to the membrane if the sidechains are hydrophobic. Proteins are sometimes anchored by a single membrane-spanning helix, sometimes by a pair, and sometimes by a helix bundle, most classically consisting of seven helices arranged up-and-down in a ring such as for rhodopsins (see image at right) or for G protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs).\n\nα-Helices under axial tensile deformation, a characteristic loading condition that appears in many alpha-helix-rich filaments and tissues, results in a characteristic three-phase behavior of stiff-soft-stiff tangent modulus. Phase I corresponds to the small-deformation regime during which the helix is stretched homogeneously, followed by phase II, in which alpha-helical turns break mediated by the rupture of groups of H-bonds. Phase III is typically associated with large-deformation covalent bond stretching.\n\nAlpha-helices in proteins may have low-frequency accordion-like motion as observed by the Raman spectroscopy and analyzed via the quasi-continuum model. Helices not stabilized by tertiary interactions show dynamic behavior, which can be mainly attributed to helix fraying from the ends.\n\nHomopolymers of amino acids (such as polylysine) can adopt α-helical structure at low temperature that is \"melted out\" at high temperatures. This helix–coil transition was once thought to be analogous to protein denaturation. The statistical mechanics of this transition can be modeled using an elegant transfer matrix method, characterized by two parameters: the propensity to initiate a helix and the propensity to extend a helix.\n\nAt least five artists have made explicit reference to the α-helix in their work: Julie Newdoll in painting and Julian Voss-Andreae, Bathsheba Grossman, Byron Rubin, and Mike Tyka in sculpture.\n\nSan Francisco area artist Julie Newdoll, who holds a degree in Microbiology with a minor in art, has specialized in paintings inspired by microscopic images and molecules since 1990. Her painting \"Rise of the Alpha Helix\" (2003) features human figures arranged in an α helical arrangement. According to the artist, \"the flowers reflect the various types of sidechains that each amino acid holds out to the world\". It is interesting to note that this same metaphor is also echoed from the scientist's side: \"β sheets do not show a stiff repetitious regularity but flow in graceful, twisting curves, and even the α-helix is regular more in the manner of a flower stem, whose branching nodes show the influence of environment, developmental history, and the evolution of each part to match its own idiosyncratic function.\"\n\nJulian Voss-Andreae is a German-born sculptor with degrees in experimental physics and sculpture. Since 2001 Voss-Andreae creates \"protein sculptures\" based on protein structure with the α-helix being one of his preferred objects. Voss-Andreae has made α-helix sculptures from diverse materials including bamboo and whole trees. A monument Voss-Andreae created in 2004 to celebrate the memory of Linus Pauling, the discoverer of the α-helix, is fashioned from a large steel beam rearranged in the structure of the α-helix. The , bright-red sculpture stands in front of Pauling's childhood home in Portland, Oregon.\n\nRibbon diagrams of α-helices are a prominent element in the laser-etched crystal sculptures of protein structures created by artist Bathsheba Grossman, such as those of insulin, hemoglobin, and DNA polymerase. Byron Rubin is a former protein crystallographer now professional sculptor in metal of proteins, nucleic acids, and drug molecules - many of which featuring α-helices, such as subtilisin, human growth hormone, and phospholipase A2.\n\nMike Tyka is a computational biochemist at the University of Washington working with David Baker. Tyka has been making sculptures of protein molecules since 2010 from copper and steel, including ubiquitin and a potassium channel tetramer.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3055", "title": "Accrington", "text": "Accrington\n\nAccrington is a town in the Hyndburn borough of Lancashire, England. It lies about east of Blackburn, west of Burnley, east of Preston, north of Manchester city centre and is situated on the mostly culverted River Hyndburn. Commonly abbreviated by locals to \"Accy\", the town has a population of 54,800 according to the 2001 census and the urban area has a population of over 85,000.\n\nAccrington is a former centre of the cotton and textile machinery industries. The town is famed for manufacturing the hardest and densest building bricks in the world, \"The Accrington NORI\" (iron), which were used in the construction of the Empire State Building and for the foundations of Blackpool Tower; famous for Accrington Stanley F.C. and the Haworth Art Gallery which holds Europe's largest collection of Tiffany glass.\n\nThe name Accrington appears to be Anglo-Saxon in origin. In the records it variously appears as \"Akarinton\" in 1194; \"Akerunton\", \"Akerinton\" and \"Akerynton\" in 1258; \"Acrinton\" in 1292; \"Ackryngton\" in 1311 and \"Acryngton\" in 1324.\n\nThe name may mean \"acorn farmstead\" from Anglo-Saxon \"æcern\" meaning \"acorn\" and \"tun\" meaning \"farmstead\" or \"village\". The southern part of Accrington, the township of New Accrington, was formerly in the Forest of Blackburnshire and the presence of oak trees may be inferred from local place names like Broad Oak and Oak Hill. The products of oak trees were once an important food for swine and a farmstead may have been named for such produce. Anglo-Saxon \"ᴁcerntun\" might become Middle English \"Akerenton\", \"Akerinton\" and the like. Also worth considering is that in the Lancashire dialect \"acorn\" was \"akran\".\n\nThere is no known Old English personal name from which the first element can be derived. But if the Frisian names \"Akkrum\", \"Akkeringa\" and Dutch name \"Akkerghem\", are derived from the personal name \"Akker\" there may be a corresponding Old English name from which \"Accrington\" may be derived.\n\nAccrington covers two townships which were established in 1507 following disafforestation; those of Old Accrington and New Accrington which were merged in 1878 with the incorporation of the borough council. There have been settlements there since the medieval period, likely in the Grange Lane and Black Abbey area, and the King's Highway which passes above the town was at one time used by the kings and queens of England when they used the area for hunting when the Forest of Accrington was one of the four forests of the hundred of Blackburnshire.\n\nRobert de Lacy gave the manor of Accrington to the monks of Kirkstall in the 12th century. The monks built a grange there; removing the inhabitants to make room for it. The locals got their revenge by setting fire to the new building, destroying its contents and in the process killing the three lay brothers who occupied it. An area of the town is named 'Black Abbey', a possible reference to the murders. Regardless of whatever happened, Accrington did not remain under monastic control for long before reverting to the de Lacys.\n\nIt is thought the monks of Kirkstall may have built a small chapel there during their tenure for the convenience of those in charge residing there and their tenants, but the records are uncertain. What is known is that there was a chapel in Accrington prior to 1553 where the vicar of Whalley was responsible for the maintenance of divine worship. However it did not have its own minister and it was served, when at all, by the curate of one of the adjacent chapels. In 1717 Accrington was served by the curate of Church, who preached there only once a month. St. James's Church was built in 1763, replacing the old chapel however it did not achieve parochial status until as late as 1870.\n\nUntil around 1830 visitors considered Accrington to be just a \"considerable village\". The Industrial Revolution, however, resulted in large changes and Accrington's location on the confluence of a number of streams made it attractive to industry and a number of mills were built in the town in the mid-eighteenth century. Further industrialisation then followed in the late eighteenth century and local landowners began building mansions in the area on the outskirts of the settlement where their mills were located while their employees lived in overcrowded unsanitary conditions in the centre.\n\nIndustrialisation resulted in rapid population growth during the nineteenth century, as people moved from over north-west England to Accrington, with the population increasing from 3,266 in 1811 to 10,376 in 1851 to 43,211 in 1901 to its peak in 1911 at 45,029.\n\nThis fast population growth and slow response from the established church allowed non-conformism to flourish in the town. By the mid-nineteenth century there were Wesleyan, Primitive Methodist, United Free Methodist, Congregationalist, Baptist, Swedenborgian, Unitarian, Roman Catholic and Catholic Apostolic churches in the town. The Swedenborgian church was so grand that it was considered to be the ‘Cathedral' of that denomination.\n\nFor many decades the textiles industry, the engineering industry and coal mining were the central activities of the town. Cotton mills and dye works provided work for the inhabitants, but often in very difficult conditions. There was regular conflict with employers over wages and working conditions. On 24 April 1826 over 1,000 men and women, many armed, gathered at Whinney Hill in Clayton-le-Moors to listen to a speaker from where they marched on Sykes's Mill at Higher Grange Lane, near the site of the modern police station and Magistrate's Courts, and smashed over 60 looms. These riots spread from Accrington through Oswaldtwistle, Blackburn, Darwen, Rossendale, Bury and Chorley. In the end after three days of riots 1,139 looms were destroyed, 4 rioters and 2 bystanders shot dead by the authorities in Rossendale and 41 rioters sentenced to death (all of whose sentences were commuted).\n\nIn the 1842 'plug riots' a general strike spread from town to town due to conditions in the town. In a population of 9,000 people as few as 100 were fully employed. From 15 August 1842 the situation boiled over and bands of men entered the mills which were running and stopped the machinery by knocking out the boiler plugs. This allowed the water and steam to escape shutting down the mill machinery. Thousands of strikers walked over the hills from one town to another to persuade people to join the strike in civil disturbances that lasted about a week. The strike was associated with the Chartist movement but eventually proved unsuccessful in its aims.\n\nIn the early 1860s the Lancashire cotton famine badly affected Accrington, although less so than the wider area due to its more diverse economy, with as many as half of the town's mill employees out of work at one time.\n\nConditions were such that a Local Board of Health was constituted in 1853 and the town itself incorporated in 1878 allowing the enforcement of local laws to improve the town.\n\nOne well-known association the town has is with the 'Accrington Pals', the nickname given to the smallest home town battalion of volunteers formed to fight in the First World War. The Pals battalions were a peculiarity of the 1914-18 war: Lord Kitchener, the Secretary of State for War, believed that it would help recruitment if friends and work-mates from the same town were able to join up and fight together. Strictly speaking, the 'Accrington Pals' battalion is properly known as the '11th East Lancashire Regiment': the nickname is a little misleading, since of the four 250-strong companies that made up the original battalion only one was composed of men from Accrington. The rest volunteered from other east Lancashire towns such as Burnley, Blackburn and Chorley.\n\nThe Pals' first day of action, 1 July 1916, took place in Serre, near Montauban in the north of France. It was part of the 'Big Push' (later known as the Battle of the Somme) that was intended to force the German Army into a retreat from the Western Front, a line they had held since late 1914. The German defences in Serre were supposed to have been obliterated by sustained, heavy, British shelling during the preceding week; however, as the battalion advanced it met with fierce resistance. 235 men were killed and a further 350 wounded — more than half of the battalion — within half an hour. Similarly desperate losses were suffered elsewhere on the front, in a disastrous day for the British Army (approximately 19,000 British soldiers were killed in a single day).\n\nLater in the year, the East Lancashire Regiment was rebuilt with new volunteers — in all, 865 Accrington men were killed during World War I. All of these names are recorded on a war memorial, an imposing white stone cenotaph, which stands in Oak Hill Park in the south of the town. The cenotaph also lists the names of 173 local fatalities from World War II. The trenches from which the Accrington Pals advanced on 1 July 1916 are still visible in John Copse west of the village of Serre, and there is a memorial there made of Accrington brick.\n\nAfter the war and until 1986, Accrington Corporation buses were painted in the regimental colours of red and blue with gold lining. The mudguards were painted black as a sign of mourning.\n\nThe 2001 census gave the population of Accrington town as 45,600. The figure for the urban area was 78,224, increased from 70,442 in 1991. This total includes Accrington, Church, Clayton-le-Moors, Great Harwood and Oswaldtwistle. For comparison purposes that is approximately the same size as Aylesbury, Carlisle, Guildford or Scunthorpe urban areas.\n\nThe borough of Hyndburn as a whole has a population of 88,996. This includes Accrington Urban Area and other outlying towns and villages such as; Altham, Baxenden, part of Belthorn, Huncoat, Rishton and Stanhill.\n\nFormerly cotton and textile machinery were important industries in the town. NORIs, a type of iron hard engineering brick, were produced nearby in Huncoat was closed in 2013, but later reopened in 2015. Mills and factories are Accrington's past but there a few factories and garages now occupy the old building.\n\nThe council has a regeneration plan in place, which will, according to the council, boost the local economy. The plan is to upgrade many old shops, and build a bus station. A memorial for the Accrington Pals may be built outside the town hall.\n\nThe Hyndburn Borough Council plans to spend £10 million to refurbish the town centre, which includes:\n\n\nHalf of Blackburn Road is being refurbished and is now being made into a more attractive shopping street, upgrading shops, adding more trees, and repaving the pavements.\n\nTwo new phases are being built, the first one called the Acorn Park, where new houses are being built with balconies and greener spaces, and Phoenix Place, which will also include new housing and the building of a new mosque to help the overcrowding of nearby mosques. The wood nook area has the highest amount of abandoned housing in Hyndburn, which is also being refurbished and extended for sale to new families.\n\nAccrington is a hill town located at the western edge of the Pennines within a bowl and largely encircled by surrounding hills to heights of 300-400m. The Hyndburn or Accrington Brook flows through the centre of the town. Hill settlements origins were as the economic foci of the district engaging in the spinning and weaving of woolen cloth. Wool, lead and coal were other local industries.\nGeographical coordinates: 53° 46' 0\" North, 2° 21' 0\" West. Height above sea level: there is a spot height outside the Market Hall which is 133.5m; the bench mark on the side of the neighbouring Town Hall is 441.10 feet. The highest height in the town is 320m which is in Baxenden and the lowest is the town hall which is at 132.5m. most of the town is around 200m.\n\nThe town has strong local travel links as Accrington railway station lies on the East Lancashire Line serving trains running locally and trains running from Blackpool to York. However, recent changes to the train timetables have been a disservice to Accrington, increasing the journey time to Preston (a vital link to London or Scotland) by up to 1.5 hours. However, there are still buses to Manchester every thirty minutes as well as more frequent services to other towns in east Lancashire. The main road running through the town centre is the A680 running from Rochdale to Whalley. The town is served by junction seven of the M65 and is linked from the A680 and the A56 dual carriageway which briefly merge; linking to the M66 motorway heading towards Manchester. The closest airports are Manchester Airport at , Blackpool Airport at and Leeds Bradford Airport at .\n\nThere was once a rail link south to Manchester via Haslingden and Bury, but this was closed in the 1960s as part of cuts following the Beeching Report. The trackbed from Accrington to Baxenden is now a linear treelined cycleway/footpath. A train service to Manchester via the Todmorden Curve opened in 2015. A new bus station is being built in Accrington too.\n\nBus operators Pilkington Bus and M&M Coaches are based in Accrington, and Holmeswood Coaches, Rosso and Transdev Blazefield subsidiaries Blackburn Bus Company and Burnley Bus Company also provide bus services in the town; routes serve places such as Blackburn, Oswaldtwistle, Rishton, Burnley and Clitheroe. However M&M Coaches ceased business suddenly on 21 September\n\nAccrington Library, on St James Street, is a Carnegie library that opened in 1908. It is noted for its stained glass window designed by Gustav Hiller and as a place of inspiration for the young Jeanette Winterson.\n\nNear the Tesco supermarket, there is Accrington Skate Park which is popular during the school holidays. On Broadway, Accrington Police Station serves the Borough of Hyndburn. In April 2003, Hyndburn Community Fire Station opened, also serving the Borough of Hyndburn.\n\nThe town is served by the Lancashire Constabulary Police station on Broadway after moving into town from its previous location on Manchester Road as an effort to save money due to rising expenses and decreasing funding by the government. Crime is very low in Accrington compared to nearby towns.\n\nAccrington is represented in parliament as a part of the constituency of Hyndburn. The constituency boundaries do not align exactly with those of the district of the same name.\n\nAccrington was first represented nationally after the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 after the 1885 general election by Accrington (UK Parliament constituency). This seat was abolished in the 1983 general election and replaced with the present constituency of Hyndburn (UK Parliament constituency).\n\nAccrington became incorporated as a municipal borough in 1878. Under the Local Government Act 1972, since 1974, the town has formed part of the larger Borough of Hyndburn including the former Urban Districts of Oswaldtwistle, Church, Clayton-le-Moors, Great Harwood and Rishton.\n\nHyndburn consists of 16 wards, electing a total of 35 councillors. Due to its size Accrington is represented by a number of wards in the Borough of Hyndburn. The town largely consists of the Milnshaw, Peel, Central, Barnfield and Spring Hill wards, although some parts of those wards are in other towns in the borough.\n\nThe local hospital is Accrington Victoria Hospital however, as it only deals with minor issues, Accident and Emergency is provided by the Royal Blackburn Hospital. Other services are provided at the Accrington Pals Primary Health Care Centre and the Accrington Acorn Primary Health Care Centre.\n\nThe chief publications in the area are the weekly \"Accrington Observer\", part of MEN media, and the \"Lancashire Telegraph\". Accrington Observer is currently stationed within the Market Hall.\n\nA Ron Hill 10K marathon happens every year at the end of March or start of April and is named for the local Olympic runner for Britain Ron Hill. The marathon goes around town and through the local countrysides, and is organised by the council and local businesses. There is also an annual 1K family run which began in 2014. In 2015 more than five hundred runners ran in the race. Their also a race held by the local rotary around August time.\n\nAccrington Stanley F.C., entered the Football League in 1921 with the formation of the old Third Division (North); after haunting the lower reaches of English football for forty years, they eventually resigned from the League in 1962, due to financial problems, and folded in 1965. The club was reformed three years later and then worked its way through the non-league divisions to reach the Nationwide Conference in 2003. In the 2005–06 season, Stanley, after winning against Woking with three matches to spare, secured a place back in the Football League and the town celebrated with a small parade and honours placed on senior executives of the team. One of the teams relegated—and thus being replaced by Stanley—were Oxford United, who were voted into the Football League to replace the previous Accrington Stanley. The football stadium is called the Crown Ground. Until the 2012-13 season, when Fleetwood Town entered the league, Accrington was the smallest town in England and Wales with a Football League club.\n\nAccrington Stanley Football Club has had its own pub in the town, the Crown, since July 2007.\n\nAn earlier club, Accrington F.C., were one of the twelve founder members of the Football League in 1888. However, their time in league football was even less successful and considerably briefer than that of Accrington Stanley: they dropped out of the league in 1893 and folded shortly afterwards due to financial problems. The town of Accrington thus has the unique \"distinction\" of having lost two separate clubs from league football. They are currently placed in League 2 alongside local club [Blackpool]\n\nAccrington has a cricket ground. Cricket is also played in parks.Schools nearby have shown major interest in cricket and have held cricket training and tournaments.\n\nAccrington has a golf course.\n\nThere are many gyms in the town and the council has held fitness classes for the women and old people. There are two sports centres, the main on being the Hyndburn Sports Centre, Which is currently renovating their swimming pool area. near Lidl.\n\nList of primary schools in Accrington;\n\nSecondary schools serving Accrington are:\n\nAll the secondary schools compete each other to achieve better results which resulted in the Hollins Technology College winning an award from SSAT for fantastic progress. The Hollins is also within the top 3% In the country and well known for its development.\nThe college in the town centre is Accrington and Rossendale College; nearby universities include University Centre at Blackburn College, and the University of Central Lancashire in Preston. There is also a library near the town centre where books and internet are available.\n\nThe Haworth Art Gallery was previously a mansion named as Hollins Hill Mansion. The museum houses a collection of Tiffany glassware presented to the town by Joseph Briggs, an Accrington man who had joined Tiffany's in the late 19th century and eventually became art director and assistant manager.It is situated in Haworth Park on Manchester Road.\nThe Viaduct is a bridge which has a railway line on it, it goes through the town and has many storage units and shop on sale buy the National Rail. The Viaduct ends at the Accrington Eco Station.\nThe Accrington Town Hall was built in the 19th century and is also listed. It has a reception rooms where pantomimes and fitness clubs are held. Weddings could also be held there. The town hall is on Blackburn Road near The Arcade.\nThe Arcade is a Victorian shopping Centre with about 10-15 outlets and has many restaurants there. It is on Church street near the town hall. The arcade has hardware shops and shops like Argos. There are some restaurants in there too. Sadly most outlets are closing since the year 2013. In 2016, there was a revamp of the Arcade which saw specialist shops such as Darts, Vinyl and Knitted Wear added into the Arcade. \nOakhill Park is a large and old park with a sceneric view of Accrington. It has won many awards such as the best park in Lancashire It has also been awarded an Eco Award. The Haworth Art Gallery is in the park. It is on Manchester Road.\nPeel Park is a park in Accrington which was opened by William Peel on 29 September 1909. The Coppice is a hill within the park, and provides a 2.2 mile scenic walk around the park. There was a centenary celebration marking 100 years from the Coppice being handed over to the people of Accrington on 26 September 2009. There was also a refurbishment of the paths and monument at the top of the Coppice at this time. Since then there has been several revamps to the Playground area of the park.\n\n\nThe centre of Accrington is located around a pedestrianised street called Broadway with shops on both sides, which connects Blackburn Road to Whalley Road. On one side of Broadway forms part of a shopping centre called the Accrington Arndale, which consists of 52 retail units, and opened in October 1987. There are two retail parks, the main one which consists of four high street chains. The markets, with indoor and outdoor stalls, are on Blackburn Road next to the Town Hall.\n\nThe indoor market was opened in 1869 and the Market Hall is now a listed building; in 2010 it was refurbished and the following year it was named as best indoor market in a National Association of British Market Authorities competition. The outdoor market, with 37 stalls, is next to it and opens most days\n\nThe town centre is home to a number of high street multiples, including: Fulton's Foods, Greggs, Argos, EE, Specsavers, cex, Wilko, Shoe Zone, Superdrug, Costa Coffee, Sports Direct, Cash Generator, GAME, Santander, Poundland, Timpson, Vodafone, Coral, Althams Travel, Ladbrokes, Paddy Power, Carphone Warehouse, Wilko, O2, Halifax, British Heart Foundation, Post Office, Thomas Cook, Thomson, Peacocks, Burton, Holland & Barrett, NatWest, Dorothy Perkins, WHSmith, Nationwide, Iceland, The Original Factory Shop, Boots Opticians, Sense, Card Factory, Subway, Boots, Store Twenty One, Poundworld, Peacocks, B&M Bargains, Wetherspoons, and a mix of other shops.\n\nIn March 2015, Subway announced plans to open a second store in Accrington. In September 2016, Papa John's Pizza announced plans to open within the Accrington Arndale. The store opened later that year.\n\nFast-food restaurants include; McDonald's, Burger King, Subway and KFC. Real Cafe is also set to return to the Streak Food Court, although this looks likely to of fell through. A BT Call Centre is also in town, employing many local people. A Viaduct VUE cinema is located in the town, having opened in October 2002, part of an entertainment complex which also had bowling alley, Accrington Super Bowl, which closed in 2013. Farmfoods and Domino's Pizza announced that they would open stores in the former Accrington Super Bowl. In July 2016, Farmfoods opened, with Domino's Pizza to follow shortly afterwards. There is also an unrented retail unit there.\n\nNear the town centre, there is a small retail park which includes a Home Bargains, Pets at Home, Iceland and Poundstretcher, in a shopping development known as Eastgate Retail Park, which opened in 1998. In June 2015, Iceland announced plans to open on the retail park. It opened in September 2015.\n\nA Tesco Extra is on Eagle Street, which opened in 2010, and a large Asda superstore on Hyndburn Road, which opened in 1985. Asda has been trading in the town since 1970, but from a different store, before moving to its current site. Asda and Tesco are the main supermarkets with discount retailers, such as Aldi and Lidl, which reopened following an rebuild. A Homebase was located in the town, but it closed in February 2015, and was converted into an B&M Homestore. A Halfords Autocentre is located in the town, as are Kwik Fit, ATS Euromaster, and National Tyres. \"Fountain Retail Park\", which opened in 1998, in honour of the aforementioned works, includes a Matalan.\n\nIn Whitebirk, a retail park, the Peel Centre, includes an Currys, PC World, Onit Furniture, Dreams, Smyths Toys Superstore, B&M Bargains, ScS Sofas, Sofaworks, Harveys Furniture & Bensons for Beds. In January 2015, Smyths Toys Superstore announced plans to open in the park, and opened in October 2015. B&M Bargains also has presence in the centre. The Range has an store in Whitebirk, located where B&Q used to be in Blackburn, before it relocated in September 2004 to the Nova Scotia Retail Park, in the Grimshaw Park area. In December 2015, Aldi announced plans to open in the park. In April 2016, the plans were approved, although the application saw opposition.\n\nThe Dunkenhalgh Hotel is owned by Mercure Hotels. In May 2012, Queen Elizabeth II stayed at the hotel, during her visit to Lancashire.\n\nThe Peel Group, the site's owner, have repetitively have had planning permission denied for a controversial expansion of the park, first in May 2005, then June 2007, and most recently August 2014, by the High Court, after an appeal was lodged. They wanted the use of the site to be changed, by adding ASDA Living, Boots, and Next, trying to make a \"copy\" of Preston's Deepdale, as well as relocating other stores. In June 2007, then–Blackburn MP Jack Straw announced that it would be the \"death knell\" for Blackburn, as did then–Hyndburn MP Greg Pope, saying that it would be the \"death knell\" for Accrington.\n\nAs well as motor dealerships from Ford (Peoples), Vauxhall & Chevrolet (Accrington Garages), the town was home to an Arnold Clark (previously Bowker BMWMini) car dealer, which closed down in 2010, and was demolished in January 2015. This was in order to make way for Brickworks, which opens in July 2015. BP, Esso (which includes a Tesco Express), and Texaco operate garages in the town. An out of town business park, Accrington Trade Park, which opened in 2004, includes an Screwfix, Eurocell, James Hargreaves, and Howdens, located nearby ASDA.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3058", "title": "Armageddon", "text": "Armageddon\n\nAccording to the Book of Revelation in the New Testament of the Bible, Armageddon (, from \"Harmagedōn\", Late Latin: , from Hebrew: הר מגידו Har Megiddo) is the prophesied location of a gathering of armies for a battle during the end times, variously interpreted as either a literal or a symbolic location. The term is also used in a generic sense to refer to any end of the world scenario.\n\n\"Mount\" Tel Megiddo is not actually a mountain, but a tell (a hill created by many generations of people living and rebuilding on the same spot) on which ancient forts were built to guard the Via Maris, an ancient trade route linking Egypt with the northern empires of Syria, Anatolia and Mesopotamia. Megiddo was the location of various ancient battles, including one in the 15th century BC and one in 609 BC. Modern Megiddo is a town approximately west-southwest of the southern tip of the Sea of Galilee in the Kishon River area in Israel.\n\nThe word \"Armageddon\" appears only once in the Greek New Testament, in . The word is translated to Greek from Hebrew \"har məgiddô\" (), \"har\" (Strong H2022) meaning \"a mountain or range of hills (sometimes used figuratively): - hill (country), mount (-ain), X promotion.\" This is a shortened form of \"Harar\" (Strong H2042) \"to loom up; a mountain; -hill, mount\". \"Megiddo\" (Strong מְגִדּוֹן H4023) /meg-id-do'/ \"Megiddon or Megiddo, a place of crowds.\") The name refers to a fortification made by King Ahab (869-50 BC) that dominated the Plain of Jezreel.\n\nMegiddo is mentioned twelve times in the Old Testament, ten times in reference to the ancient city of Megiddo, and twice with reference to \"the plain of Megiddo\", most probably simply meaning \"the plain next to the city\".\nNone of these Old Testament passages describes the city of Megiddo as being associated with any particular prophetic beliefs. The one New Testament reference to the city of Armageddon found in in fact also makes no specific mention of any armies being predicted to one day gather in this city, but instead seems to predict only that \"they (will gather) the kings together to ... Armageddon\". \nThe text does however seem to imply, based on the text from the earlier passage of Revelation 16:14, that the purpose of this gathering of kings in the \"place called Armageddon\" is \"for the war of the great day of God, the Almighty\".  Because of the seemingly highly symbolic and even cryptic language of this one New Testament passage, some Christian scholars conclude that Mount Armageddon must be an idealized location. Rushdoony says, \"There are no mountains of Megiddo, only the Plains of Megiddo. This is a deliberate destruction of the vision of any literal reference to the place.\" \nOther scholars, including C. C. Torrey, Kline and Jordan argue that the word is derived from the Hebrew \"moed\" (), meaning \"assembly\".  Thus, \"Armageddon\" would mean \"Mountain of Assembly,\" which Jordan says is \"a reference to the assembly at Mount Sinai, and to its replacement, Mount Zion.\"\n\nThe traditional viewpoint interprets this Bible prophecy to be symbolic of the progression of the world toward the \"great day of God, the Almighty\" in which the great looming mountain of God's just and holy wrath is poured out against unrepentant sinners, led by Satan, in a literal end-of-the-world final confrontation. Armageddon is the symbolic name given to this event based on scripture references regarding divine obliteration of God's enemies. The hermeneutical method supports this position by referencing Judges 4 and 5 where God miraculously destroys the enemy of His elect, Israel, at Megiddo, also called the Valley of Josaphat.\n\nChristian scholar William Hendriksen says:\nThe Dispensational viewpoint interprets biblical prophecy literally and expects that the fulfillment of prophecy will also be literal, depending upon the context of scripture.  In his discussion of Armageddon, J. Dwight Pentecost has devoted an entire chapter to the subject, titled \"The Campaign of Armageddon\", in which he discusses Armageddon as a campaign and not a specific battle, which will be fought in the Middle East. Pentecost writes:\nPentecost then discusses the location of this campaign, and mentions the \"hill of Megiddo\" and other geographic locations such as \"the valley of Jehoshaphat\" and \"the valley of the passengers\", \"Lord coming from Edom or Idumea, south of Jerusalem, when He returns from the judgment\"; and Jerusalem itself.\n\nPentecost further describes the area involved:\nPentecost then outlines the biblical time period for this campaign to occur and with further arguments concludes that it must take place with the 70th week of Daniel. The invasion of Israel by the Northern Confederacy \"will bring the Beast and his armies to the defense of Israel as her protector\". He then uses Daniel to further clarify his thinking: (Dan. 11:40b-45).\n\nAgain, events are listed by Pentecost in his book:\n\nAfter the destruction of the Beast at the Second Coming of Jesus, the promised Kingdom is set up, in which Jesus and the Saints will rule for a thousand years. Satan is then loosed \"for a season\" and goes out to deceive the nations, specifically, Gog and Magog. The army mentioned attacks the Saints in the New Jerusalem, they are defeated by a judgment of fire coming down from Heaven, and then comes the Great White Throne judgment, which includes all of those through the ages and these are cast into the Lake of Fire, which event is also known as the \"second death\" and Gehenna, not to be confused with Hell, which is Satan's domain. Pentecost describes this as follows:\n\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that Armageddon is the means by which God will fulfill his purpose for the Earth to be populated with happy healthy humans free of sin and death. They teach that the armies of heaven will eradicate all who oppose the Kingdom of God, wiping out all wicked humans on Earth, leaving only righteous mankind.\n\nThey believe that the gathering of all the nations of the earth refers to the uniting of the world's political powers, as a gradual process beginning in 1914 and seen later in manifestations such as the League of Nations and the United Nations following the First and Second World Wars. These political powers are said to be influenced by Satan and his demons in opposition to God's kingdom. Babylon the Great is interpreted as the world empire of false religion, and that it will be destroyed by the beast just prior to Armageddon. Witnesses believe that after all other religions have been destroyed, the governments will turn to persecute them, and that God will then intervene, precipitating Armageddon.\nJehovah's Witnesses teach that the armies of heaven, led by Jesus, will then destroy all forms of human government and then Jesus, along with a selected 144,000 humans, will rule Earth for 1,000 years. They believe that Satan and his demons will be bound for that period, unable to influence mankind. After the 1,000 years are ended, and the second resurrection has taken place, Satan is released and allowed to tempt the perfect human race one last time. Those who follow Satan are destroyed, along with him, leaving the earth, and humankind at peace with God forever, free of sin and death.\n\nThe religion's current teaching on Armageddon originated in 1925 with former Watch Tower Society president J. F. Rutherford, who based his interpretations on the books of Exodus, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Psalms as well as additional material from the books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles. The doctrine marked a further break from the teachings of Watch Tower Society founder Charles Taze Russell, who for decades had taught that the final war would be an anarchistic struggle for domination on earth. Tony Wills, author of a historical study of Jehovah's Witnesses, claimed that Rutherford seemed to relish his descriptions of how completely the wicked would be destroyed at Armageddon, dwelling at great length on prophecies of destruction. He stated that towards the close of his ministry Rutherford allocated about half the space available in \"The Watchtower\" magazines to discussion of Armageddon.\n\nThe teachings of the Seventh-day Adventist Church state that the terms \"Armageddon\", \"Day of the Lord\" and \"The Second Coming of Christ\" all describe the same event. Seventh-day Adventists further teach that the current religious movements taking place in the world are setting the stage for Armageddon, and they are concerned by an anticipated unity between spiritualism, American Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. A further significant difference in Seventh-day Adventist theology is the teaching that the events of Armageddon will leave the earth desolate for the duration of the millennium. They teach that the righteous will be taken to heaven while the rest of humanity will be destroyed, leaving Satan with no one to tempt and effectively \"bound.\" The final re-creation of a \"new heaven and a new earth.\" then follows the millennium.\n\nFor Christadelphians, Armageddon marks the \"great climax of history when the nations would be gathered together 'into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon', and the judgment on them would herald the setting up of the Kingdom of God.\" \n\nIn Ahmadiyya, Armageddon is viewed as a spiritual battle or struggle in the present age between the forces of good, i.e. righteousness, purity and virtue, and the forces of evil. The final struggle between the two comes as satanic influence is let loose with the emergence of Gog and Magog. Satan gathers all his powers, and uses all his methods to mislead people, introducing an age where iniquity, promiscuity, atheism, and materialism abound.\n\nAhmadiyya believe that God appointed Promised Messiah and Mahdi for the spiritual reformation and moral direction of mankind. This age continues for approximately one thousand years as per Judeo-Christian and Islamic prophecies of the Apocalypse; it is characterised by the assembling of mankind under one faith, Islam in Ahmadiyya belief.\n\nFrom Bahá'í literature a number of interpretations of the expectations surrounding the Battle of Armageddon may be inferred, three of them being associated with events surrounding the World Wars.\n\nThe first interpretation deals with a series of tablets written by Bahá'u'lláh, founder of the Bahá'í Faith, to be sent to various kings and rulers. The second, and best-known one, relates to events near the end of World War I involving General Allenby and the Battle of Megiddo (1918) wherein World Powers are said to have drawn soldiers from many parts of the world to engage in battle at Megiddo. In winning this battle Allenby also prevented the Turks from killing 'Abdu'l-Baha, then head of the Baha'i Faith, whom they had intended to crucify. A third interpretation reviews the overall progress of the World Wars, and the situation in the world before and after.\n\nThe idea that a final Battle of Armageddon will be fought at Tel Megiddo has had a wide influence, especially in the US. According to Donald E. Wagner, Professor of Religion and Director of the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at North Park University, Ronald Reagan was an adherent of \"Armageddon theology,\" and \"seemed to blend his political analysis with his Armageddon theology quite naturally.\"\n\nAn American militia group called Hutaree, based on the idea that it will soon defend itself from the Antichrist's armies, received wide attention in 2010, when several members were indicted for plotting to kill a police officer and plant roadside bombs along the funeral procession. The charges were dismissed.\n\n"}
{"id": "3060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3060", "title": "Athlon", "text": "Athlon\n\nAthlon is the brand name applied to a series of x86-compatible microprocessors designed and manufactured by Advanced Micro Devices (AMD). The original Athlon (now called \"Athlon Classic\") was the first seventh-generation x86 processor. The original Athlon was the first desktop processor to reach speeds of one gigahertz (GHz). AMD has continued using the \"Athlon\" name with the Athlon 64, an eighth-generation processor featuring x86-64 (later renamed AMD64) architecture, and the Athlon II. AMD also uses the \"Athlon\" name for some of its series of APUs targeting the Socket AM1 desktop SoC architecture.\n\nThe Athlon made its debut on June 23, 1999. Athlon comes from the Ancient Greek (\"athlon\") meaning ″(sport) contest″, or \"prize of a contest\", or \"place of a contest; arena\".\n\nAMD founder (and then-CEO) Jerry Sanders aggressively pursued strategic partnerships and engineering talent in the late 1990s, desiring to leverage the success AMD had gained in the PC market with the preceding AMD K6 line of processors. One major partnership announced in 1998 paired AMD with semiconductor giant Motorola to co-develop copper-based semiconductor technology, and resulted with the K7 project being the first commercial processor to utilize copper fabrication technology. In the announcement, Sanders referred to the partnership as creating a \"virtual gorilla\" that would enable AMD to compete with Intel on fabrication capacity while limiting AMD's financial outlay for new facilities.\n\nThe K7 design team was led by Dirk Meyer, who had worked as a lead engineer at DEC on multiple Alpha microprocessors during his employment at DEC. When DEC was sold to Compaq in 1998, the company discontinued Alpha processor development. Sanders approached many of the Alpha engineering staff as Compaq/DEC wound down their semiconductor business, and was able to bring in nearly all of the Alpha design team. The K7 engineering design team was thus now consisted of both the previously acquired NexGen K6 team (already including engineers such as Vinod Dham) and the nearly complete Alpha design team.\n\nIn August 1999, AMD released the Athlon (K7) processor.\n\nBy working with Motorola, AMD was able to refine copper interconnect manufacturing to the production stage about one year before Intel. The revised process permitted 180-nanometer processor production. The accompanying die-shrink resulted in lower power consumption, permitting AMD to increase Athlon clock speeds to the 1 GHz range. Yields on the new process exceeded expectations, permitting AMD to deliver high speed chips in volume in March 2000.\n\nThe Athlon architecture also used the EV6 bus licensed from DEC as its main system bus. Intel required licensing to use the GTL+ bus used by its Slot 1 Pentium II and later processors. By licensing the EV6 bus used by the Alpha line of processors from DEC, AMD was able to develop its own chipsets and motherboards, and avoid being dependent on licensing from its direct competitor.\n\nInternally, the Athlon is a fully seventh generation x86 processor, the first of its kind. Like the AMD K5 and K6, the Athlon dynamically buffers internal micro-instructions at runtime resulting from parallel x86 instruction decoding. The CPU is an out-of-order design, again like previous post-5x86 AMD CPUs. The Athlon utilizes the Alpha 21264's EV6 bus architecture with double data rate (DDR) technology. This means that at 100 MHz, the Athlon front side bus actually transfers at a rate similar to a 200 MHz single data rate bus (referred to as 200 MT/s), which was superior to the method used on Intel's Pentium III (with SDR bus speeds of 100 MHz and 133 MHz).\n\nAMD designed the CPU with more robust x86 instruction decoding capabilities than that of K6, to enhance its ability to keep more data in-flight at once. The Athlon's three decoders could potentially decode three x86 instructions to six microinstructions per clock, although this was somewhat unlikely in real-world use. The critical branch predictor unit, essential to keeping the pipeline busy, was enhanced compared to what was on board the K6. Deeper pipelining with more stages allowed higher clock speeds to be attained. Whereas the AMD K6-III+ topped out at 570 MHz due to its short pipeline, even when built on the 180 nm process, the Athlon was capable of clocking much higher.\n\nAMD ended its long-time handicap with floating point x87 performance by designing a super-pipelined, out-of-order, triple-issue floating point unit. Each of its three units was tailored to be able to calculate an optimal type of instructions with some redundancy. By having separate units, it was possible to operate on more than one floating point instruction at once. This FPU was a huge step forward for AMD. While the K6 FPU had looked anemic compared to the Intel P6 FPU, with Athlon this was no longer the case.\n\nThe 3DNow! floating point SIMD technology, again present, received some revisions and a name change to \"Enhanced 3DNow!\". Additions included DSP instructions and an implementation of the extended MMX subset of Intel SSE.\n\nThe Athlon's CPU cache consisted of the typical two levels. Athlon was the first x86 processor with a 128 kB split level 1 cache; a 2-way associative cache separated into 2×64 kB for data and instructions (a concept from Harvard architecture). This cache was double the size of K6's already large 2×32 kB cache, and quadruple the size of Pentium II and III's 2×16 kB L1 cache. The initial Athlon (Slot A, later called Athlon Classic) used 512 kB of level 2 cache separate from the CPU, on the processor cartridge board, running at 50% to 33% of core speed. This was done because the 250 nm manufacturing process was too large to allow for on-die cache while maintaining cost-effective die size. Later Athlon CPUs, afforded greater transistor budgets by smaller 180 nm and 130 nm process nodes, moved to on-die L2 cache at full CPU clock speed.\n\nThe AMD Athlon processor launched on June 23, 1999, with general availability by August '99. It launched at 500 MHz and was, on average, 10% faster than the Pentium III at the same clock for Business applications, and even faster (~20%) for gaming workloads.\n\nThe Athlon Classic is a cartridge-based processor, named Slot A and similar to Intel's cartridge Slot 1 used for Pentium II and Pentium III. It used the same, commonly available, physical 242 pin connector used by Intel Slot 1 processors but rotated by 180 degrees to connect the processor to the motherboard. The reversal served to make the slot keyed to prevent installation of the wrong CPU, as the Athlon and Intel processors used fundamentally different (and incompatible) signaling standards for their front-side bus. The cartridge assembly allowed the use of higher speed cache memory modules than could be put on (or reasonably bundled with) motherboards at the time. Similar to the Pentium II and the Katmai-based Pentium III, the Athlon Classic contained 512 kB of L2 cache. This high-speed SRAM cache was run at a divisor of the processor clock and was accessed via its own 64-bit bus, known as a \"back-side bus\" allowing the processor to both service system front side bus requests (the rest of the system) and cache accesses simultaneously versus the traditional approach of pushing \"everything\" through the front-side bus.\n\nOne limitation (also afflicting the Intel Pentium III) is that SRAM cache designs at the time were incapable of keeping up with the Athlon's clock scalability, due both to manufacturing limitations of the cache chips and the difficulty of routing electrical connections to the cache chips themselves. It became increasingly difficult to reliably run an external processor cache to match the processor speeds being released—and in fact it became impossible. Thus initially the Level 2 cache ran at half of the CPU clock speed up to 700 MHz (350 MHz cache). Faster Slot-A processors had to compromise further and run at 2/5 (up to 850 MHz, 340 MHz cache) or 1/3 (up to 1 GHz, 333 MHz cache). This later race to 1 GHz (1000 MHz) by AMD and Intel further exacerbated this bottleneck as ever higher speed processors demonstrated decreasing gains in overall performance—stagnant SRAM cache memory speeds choked further improvements in overall speed. This directly lead to the development of integrating L2 cache onto the processor itself and remove the dependence on external cache chips. AMD's integration of the cache onto the Athlon processor itself would later result in the Athlon Thunderbird.\n\nThe Slot-A Athlons were the first multiplier-locked CPUs from AMD. This was partly done to hinder CPU remarking being done by questionable resellers around the globe. AMD's older CPUs could simply be set to run at whatever clock speed the user chose on the motherboard, making it trivial to relabel a CPU and sell it as a faster grade than it was originally intended. These relabeled CPUs were not always stable, being overclocked and not tested properly, and this was damaging to AMD's reputation. Although the Athlon was multiplier locked, crafty enthusiasts eventually discovered that a connector on the PCB of the cartridge could control the multiplier. Eventually a product called the \"Goldfingers device\" was created by inventors Ryan Petersen and Micheal Franz Schuete that could unlock the CPU, named after the gold connector pads on the processor board that it attached to.\n\nIn commercial terms, the Athlon \"Classic\" was an enormous success—not just because of its own merits, but also because Intel endured a series of major production, design, and quality control issues at this time. In particular, Intel's transition to the 180 nm production process, starting in late 1999 and running through to mid-2000, suffered delays. There was a shortage of Pentium III parts. In contrast, AMD enjoyed a remarkably smooth process transition and had ample supplies available, causing Athlon sales to become quite strong.\n\nThe Argon-based Athlon contained 22 million transistors and measured 184 mm. It was fabricated by AMD in a slightly modified version of their CS44E process, a 0.25 µm complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) process with six levels of aluminium interconnect. \"Pluto\" and \"Orion\" Athlons were fabricated in a 0.18 µm process.\n\n\nThe second generation Athlon, the \"Thunderbird\", debuted on June 5, 2000. This version of the Athlon shipped in a more traditional pin-grid array (PGA) format that plugged into a socket (\"Socket A\") on the motherboard (it also shipped in the slot A package). It was sold at speeds ranging from 600 MHz to 1.4 GHz (Athlon Classics using the Slot A package could clock up to 1 GHz). The major difference, however, was cache design. Just as Intel had done when they replaced the old Katmai-based Pentium III with the much faster Coppermine-based Pentium III, AMD replaced the 512 kB external reduced-speed cache of the Athlon Classic with 256 kB of on-chip, full-speed exclusive cache. As a general rule, more cache improves performance, but faster cache improves it further still.\n\nAMD changed cache design significantly with the Thunderbird core. With the older Athlon CPUs, the CPU caching was of an inclusive design where data from the L1 is duplicated in the L2 cache. Thunderbird moved to an exclusive design where the L1 cache's contents are not duplicated in the L2. This increases total cache size of the processor and effectively makes caching behave as if there is a very large L1 cache with a slower region (the L2) and a very fast region (the L1). Because of Athlon's very large L1 cache and the exclusive design, which turns the L2 cache into basically a \"victim cache\", the need for high L2 performance and size was lessened. AMD kept the 64-bit L2 cache data bus from the older Athlons, as a result, and allowed it to have a relatively high latency. A simpler L2 cache reduced the possibility of the L2 cache causing clock scaling and yield issues. Still, instead of the 2-way associative scheme used in older Athlons, Thunderbird did move to a more efficient 16-way associative layout.\n\nThe Thunderbird was AMD's most successful product since the Am386DX-40 ten years earlier. Mainboard designs had improved considerably by this time, and the initial trickle of Athlon mainboard makers had swollen to include every major manufacturer. AMD's new fab in Dresden came online, allowing further production increases, and the process technology was improved by a switch to copper interconnects. In October 2000, the Athlon \"C\" was introduced, raising the mainboard front-side bus speed from 100 MHz to 133 MHz (266 MT/s) and providing roughly 10% extra performance per clock over the \"B\" model Thunderbird.\n\n\nAMD released the third-generation Athlon, code-named \"Palomino\", on October 9, 2001 as the \"Athlon XP\". The \"XP\" suffix is interpreted to mean \"extended performance\" and also as an unofficial reference to Microsoft Windows XP. The \"Athlon XP\" was marketed using a PR system, which compared its relative performance to an Athlon utilizing the earlier \"Thunderbird\" core. \"Athlon XP\" launched at speeds between 1.33 GHz (PR1500+) and 1.53 GHz (PR1800+), giving AMD the x86 performance lead with the 1800+ model. Less than a month later, it enhanced that lead with the release of the 1600 MHz 1900+, and subsequent 1.67 GHz Athlon XP 2000+ in January 2002.\n\nPalomino was the first K7 core to include the full SSE instruction set from the Intel Pentium III, as well as AMD's 3DNow! Professional. It is roughly 10% faster than Thunderbird at the same clock speed, thanks in part to the new SIMD functionality and to several additional improvements. The core has enhancements to the K7's TLB architecture and added a hardware data prefetch mechanism to take better advantage of available memory bandwidth. Palomino was also the first socketed Athlon officially supporting dual processing, with chips certified for that purpose branded as the Athlon MP. According to articles posted on HardwareZone, it was possible to mod the Athlon XP to function as an MP by connecting some fuses on the OPGA, although results varied with the motherboard used.\n\nChanges in core layout also resulted in Palomino being more frugal with its electrical demands, consuming approximately 20% less power than its predecessor, and thus reducing heat output comparatively as well. While the preceding Athlon \"Thunderbird\" was capable of clock speeds exceeding 1400 MHz, the power and thermal considerations required to reach those speeds would have made it increasingly impractical as a marketable product. Thus, Palomino's goals of lowered power consumption (and resultant heat produced) allowed AMD to increase performance within a reasonable power envelope. Palomino's design also allowed AMD to continue using the same 180 nm manufacturing process node and core voltages as Thunderbird.\n\nInterestingly, the Palomino core actually debuted earlier in the mobile market—branded as Mobile Athlon 4 with the codename \"Corvette\". It distinctively used a ceramic interposer much like the Thunderbird instead of the organic pin grid array package used on all later Palomino processors.\n\n\nThe fourth-generation Athlon \"Thoroughbred\" was released on June 10, 2002 at 1.8 GHz (Athlon XP PR2200+). The \"Thoroughbred\" core marked AMD's first production 130 nm silicon, resulting in a significant reduction in die size compared to its 180 nm predecessor.\n\nThere came to be two steppings (revisions) of this core commonly referred to as Tbred-A (cpuid:6 8 0) and Tbred-B (cpuid:6 8 1). The initial version (later known as A) was simply a direct die shrink of the Palomino, and demonstrated that AMD had successfully transitioned to a 130 nm process. While successful in reducing the production cost per processor, the unmodified Palomino design did not demonstrate the expected reduction in heat and clock scalability usually seen when a design is shrunk to a smaller process. As a result, AMD was not able to increase Thoroughbred-A clock speeds much above those of the Palomino it was to replace. Tbred-A was only sold in versions from 1333 MHz to 1800 MHz, and was only able to displace the more production-costly Palomino from AMD's lineup.\n\nAMD thus reworked the Thoroughbred's design to better match the process node on which it was produced, in turn creating the Thoroughbred-B. A significant aspect of this redesign was the addition of another ninth \"metal layer\" to the already quite complex eight-layered Thoroughbred-A. For comparison, the competing Pentium 4 Northwood only utilized six, and its successor Prescott seven layers. While the addition of more layers itself does not improve performance, it gives more flexibility for chip designers routing electrical pathways within a chip, and importantly for the Thoroughbred core, more flexibility in working around electrical bottlenecks that prevented the processor from attaining higher clock speeds. The Tbred-B offered a startling improvement in headroom over the Tbred-A, which made it very popular for overclocking. The Tbred-A often struggled to reach clock speeds above 1.9 GHz, while the Tbred-B often could easily reach 2.3 GHz and above.\n\nThe Thoroughbred line received an increased front side bus clock during its lifetime, from 133 MHz (266 MT/s) to 166 MHz (333 MT/s) improving the processor's ability to access memory and I/O efficiency, and resulted in improved per-clock performance. AMD shifted their PR rating scheme accordingly, making lower clock speeds equate to higher PR ratings.\n\nThe Thoroughbred-B was the \"direct\" basis for its successor—the Tbred-B with an \"additional\" 256 kB of L2 cache (for 512 kB total) became the Barton core.\n\n\nFifth-generation Athlon \"Barton\"-core processors released in early 2003 with PR of 2500+, 2600+, 2800+, 3000+, and 3200+. While not operating at higher clock rates than \"Thoroughbred\"-core processors, they were marked with higher PR by featuring an increased 512 kB L2 cache; later models additionally supported an increased 200 MHz (400 MT/s) front side bus. The \"Thorton\" core was a later variant of the \"Barton\" with half of the L2 cache disabled, and thus was functionally identical to the \"Thoroughbred-B\" core. The name \"Thorton\" is a portmanteau of \"Thoroughbred\" and \"Barton\".\n\nBy the time of Barton's release, the \"Northwood\"-based Pentium 4 had become more than competitive with AMD's processors. Unfortunately for AMD, a simple increase in size of the L2 cache to 512 kB did not have nearly the same impact as it did for Intel's Pentium 4 line, as the Athlon architecture was not nearly as cache-constrained as the Pentium 4. The Athlon's exclusive-cache architecture and shorter pipeline made it less sensitive to L2 cache size, and the Barton only saw an increase of several percent gained in per-clock performance over the Thoroughbred-B it was derived from. While the increased performance was welcome, it was not sufficient to overtake the Pentium 4 line in overall performance. The PR also became somewhat inaccurate because some Barton models with lower clock rates were being given higher PR than higher-clocked Thoroughbred processors. Instances where a computational task did not benefit more from the additional cache to make up for the loss in raw clock speed created situations where a lower rated (but faster clocked) Thoroughbred would outperform a higher-rated (but lower clocked) Barton.\n\nThe Barton was also used to officially introduce a higher 400 MT/s bus clock for the Socket A platform, which was used to gain some Barton models more efficiency (and increased PR). However, it was clear by this time that Intel's quad-pumped bus was scaling well above AMD's double-pumped EV6 bus. The 800 MT/s bus used by many later Pentium 4 processors was well out of the Athlon XP's reach. In order to reach the same bandwidth levels, the Athlon XP's bus would have to be clocked at levels simply unreachable.\n\nBy this point, the four-year-old Athlon EV6 bus architecture had scaled to its limit. To maintain or exceed the performance of Intel's newer processors would require a significant redesign. The K7 derived Athlons were replaced in March 2003 by the Athlon 64 family, which featured an on-chip memory controller and a completely new HyperTransport bus to replace EV6.\n\n\"Barton (130 nm)\"\n\n\"Thorton (130 nm)\"\n\nA Mobile Athlon XPs (\"Athlon XP-M\") using a given core is physically identical to the equivalent desktop Athlon XPs counterpart, only differing by the configuration used to achieve a given performance level. Processors are usually binned and selected to become a mobile processor by their ability run a given processor speed while supplied with a lower (than desktop) voltage. This results in lower power consumption, longer battery life, and reduced heat over using a normal desktop part. Additionally Mobile XPs feature not being multiplier-locked and generally higher-rated maximum operating temperatures, requirements intended for better operation within the tight thermal constraints within a notebook PC—but also making them attractive for overclocking.\n\nThe Athlon XP-M replaced the older Mobile Athlon 4 based on the \"Palomino\" core, with the Athlon XP-M using the newer \"Thoroughbred\" and \"Barton\" cores. The Athlon XP-M was also offered in a compact microPGA socket 563 version for space constrained applications as an alternative to the larger Socket A.\n\nLike their mobile K6-2+/III+ predecessors, the CPUs were capable of dynamic clock adjustment for power optimization, and also was the reason for the unlocked multiplier. When the system is idle, the CPU clocks itself down via lower bus multiplier and selects a lower voltage. When a program demands more computational resources, the CPU quickly (there is some latency) returns to an intermediate or maximum speed with appropriate voltage to meet the demand. This technology was marketed as \"PowerNow!\" and was similar to Intel's SpeedStep power saving technique. The feature was controlled by the CPU, motherboard BIOS, and operating system. AMD later renamed the technology to Cool'n'Quiet on their K8-based CPUs (Athlon 64, etc.), and introduced it for use on desktop PCs as well.\n\nAthlon XP-Ms were popular with desktop overclockers, as well as underclockers. The lower voltage requirement and higher heat rating selected CPUs that were essentially \"cherry picked\" from the manufacturing line. Being some of the best cores \"off the line\", these CPUs typically overclocked more reliably than their desktop-headed counterparts. Also, the fact that they were not locked to a single multiplier was a significant simplification in the overclocking process. Some \"Barton\" core Athlon XP-Ms have been successfully overclocked as high as 3.1 GHz.\n\nThe chips were also liked for their undervolting ability. Undervolting is a process of determining the lowest voltage at which a CPU can remain stable at a given clock speed. As Athlon XP-M CPUs were already rated running lower voltages than their desktop siblings, it was a better starting point for lowering voltage even further. A popular application was use in home theater PC systems due to high performance and low heat output resultant from low Vcore settings.\n\nBesides not being multiplier locked, XP-Ms curiously were not disabled from multi processor operation. Thus they could be used in place of the more expensive Athlon MP in dual socket A motherboards. Since those boards generally lacked multiplier and voltage adjustment, and normally only supported 133 MHz FSB, adjustments would still be needed for full speed operation. One method of modification known as wire-modding involves connecting the appropriate CPU pins on the CPU socket with small lengths of wire to select the appropriate multiplier. A typical overclock of a mobile 2500+ CPU to 2.26 GHz with 17x multiplier would result in being faster than highest official 2800+ MP CPU running at 2.13 GHz.\n\n\nThe fastest supercomputers based on AthlonMP:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3065", "title": "Amnon", "text": "Amnon\n\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Amnon (, \"faithful\") was the oldest son of David and his wife, Ahinoam, who is described as \"the Jezreelitess\", born in Hebron when David was king of Judah.\nAlthough he was the heir-apparent to David's throne, Amnon is best remembered for the rape of his half-sister Tamar, daughter of David and Maachah. Despite the biblical prohibition on sexual relations between half-brothers and sisters, Amnon had an overwhelming desire for her. He acted on advice from his cousin, Jonadab the son of Shimeah, David's brother, to lure Tamar into his quarters by pretending to be sick and desiring her to cook a special meal for him. While in his quarters, and ignoring her protests, he raped her, then had her expelled from his house. King David was angry about the incident, but could not bring himself to punish his eldest son, while Absalom, Amnon's half-brother and Tamar's full brother, nursed a bitter grudge against Amnon for the rape of his sister.\nTwo years later, to avenge Tamar, Absalom invited all of David's sons to a feast at sheep-shearing time, then had his servants kill Amnon after he had become drunk with wine. As a result, Absalom fled to Geshur.\n\n"}
{"id": "3067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3067", "title": "Amu Darya", "text": "Amu Darya\n\nThe Amu Darya, also called the Amu River and historically known by its Latin name, , is a major river in Central Asia. It is formed by the junction of the Vakhsh and Panj rivers, at Qal`eh-ye Panjeh in Afghanistan, and flows from there north-westwards into the southern remnants of the Aral Sea. In ancient times, the river was regarded as the boundary between Greater Iran and Turan.\n\nThe Amu Darya (, \"\"; /; //; ; , \"; \"), also called the Amu River, is a major river in Central Asia.\n\nIn classical antiquity, the river was known as the \"Ōxus\" in Latin and Ὦξος \"Ôxos\" in Greek—a clear derivative of Vakhsh, the name of the largest tributary of the river. In Vedic Sanskrit, the river is also referred to as Vakṣu (वक्षु). The Avestan texts too refer to the River as Yakhsha/Vakhsha (and Yakhsha Arta (\"upper Yakhsha\") referring to the Jaxartes/Syr Darya twin river to Amu Darya).\n\nIn Middle Persian sources of the Sassanid period the river is known as \"Wehrōd\" (lit. \"good river\").\n\nThe name \"Amu\" is said to have come from the medieval city of \"Āmul\", (later, Chahar Joy/Charjunow, and now known as Türkmenabat), in modern Turkmenistan, with \"Darya\" being the Persian word for \"river\".\n\nMedieval Arabic and Muslim sources call the river \"Jayhoun\" (جيحون) which is derived from \"Gihon\", the biblical name for one of the four rivers of the Garden of Eden.\n\nWestern travelers in the 19th century mention that one of the names by which the river was known in Afghanistan was Gozan, and that this name was used by Greek, Mongol, Chinese, Persian, Jewish, and Afghan historians. However, this name is no longer used.\n\nThe river's total length is and its drainage basin totals in area, providing a mean discharge of around of water per year. The river is navigable for over . All of the water comes from the high mountains in the south where annual precipitation can be over . Even before large-scale irrigation began, high summer evaporation meant that not all of this discharge reached the Aral Sea – though there is some evidence the large Pamir glaciers provided enough melt water for the Aral to overflow during the 13th and 14th centuries.\n\nSince the end of the 19th century there have been four different claimants as the true source of the Oxus:\n\nA glacier turns into the Wakhan River and joins the Pamir River about downstream.\nBill Colegrave's expedition to Wakhan in 2007 found that both claimants 2 and 3 had the same source, the Chelab stream, which bifurcates on the watershed of the Little Pamir, half flowing into Lake Chamaktin and half into the parent stream of the Little Pamir/Sarhad River. Therefore, the Chelab stream may be properly considered the true source or parent stream of the Oxus.\nThe Panj River forms the border of Afghanistan and Tajikistan. It flows west to Ishkashim where it turns north and then north-west through the Pamirs passing the Tajikistan–Afghanistan Friendship Bridge. It subsequently forms the border of Afghanistan and Uzbekistan for about , passing Termez and the Afghanistan–Uzbekistan Friendship Bridge. It delineates the border of Afghanistan and Turkmenistan for another before it flows into Turkmenistan at Atamurat. As the \"Amudarya\", it flows across Turkmenistan south to north, passing Türkmenabat, and forms the border of Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan from Halkabat. It is then split by the Tuyamuyun Hydro Complex into many waterways that used to form the river delta joining the Aral Sea, passing Urgench, Daşoguz, and other cities, but it does not reach what is left of the sea any more and is lost in the desert.\n\nUse of water from the Amu Darya for irrigation has been a major contributing factor to the shrinking of the Aral Sea since the late 1950s.\n\nHistorical records state that in different periods, the river flowed into the Aral Sea (from the south), into the Caspian Sea (from the east), or both, similar to the Syr Darya (Jaxartes, in Ancient Greek).\n\nThe of the Amu Darya drainage basin include most of Tajikistan, the southwest corner of Kyrgyzstan, the northeast corner of Afghanistan, a narrow portion of eastern Turkmenistan and the western half of Uzbekistan. Part of the Amu Darya basin divide in Tajikistan forms that country's border with China (in the east) and Pakistan (to the south). About 61% of the drainage lies within Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, while 39% is in Afghanistan.\n\nThe abundant water flowing in the Amu Darya comes almost entirely from glaciers in the Pamir Mountains and Tian Shan,\nwhich, standing above the surrounding arid plain, collect atmospheric moisture which otherwise would probably escape somewhere else. Without its mountain water sources, the Amu Darya would not contain any water—would not exist—because it rarely rains in the lowlands through which most of the river flows. Of the total drainage area only about actively contribute water to the river.\nThis is because many of the river's major tributaries (especially the Zeravshan River) have been diverted, and much of the river's drainage is arid. Throughout most of the steppe, the annual rainfall is about .\n\nThe ancient Greeks called the Amu Darya the \"Oxus\". In ancient times, the river was regarded as the boundary between Greater Iran and Tūrān. The river's drainage lies in the area between the former empires of Genghis Khan and Alexander the Great, although they occurred at very different times. When the Mongols came to the area, they used the water of the Amu Darya to flood Konye-Urgench. One southern route of the Silk Road ran along part of the Amu Darya northwestward from Termez before going westwards to the Caspian Sea.\n\nIt is believed that the Amu Darya's course across the Kara-Kum Desert has gone through several major shifts in the past few thousand years. Much of the time – most recently from the 13th century to the late 16th century – the Amu Darya emptied into both the Aral and the Caspian Seas, reaching the latter via a large distributary called the Uzboy River. The Uzboy splits off from the main channel just south of the Amudarya Delta. Sometimes the flow through the two branches was more or less equal, but often most of the Amu Darya's flow split to the west and flowed into the Caspian.\n\nPeople began to settle along the lower Amu Darya and the Uzboy in the 5th century, establishing a thriving chain of agricultural lands, towns, and cities. In about 985 AD the massive Gurganj Dam at the bifurcation of the forks started to divert water to the Aral. Genghis Khan's troops destroyed the dam in 1221, and the Amu Darya shifted to distributing its flow more or less equally between the main stem and the Uzboy. But in the 18th century, the river again turned north, flowing into the Aral Sea, a path it has taken since. Less and less water flowed down the Uzboy. When Russian explorer, Bekovich—Cherkasski suveyed the region in 1720, Amu Darya did not flow into the Caspian Sea anymore.\n\nThe first Englishman to reach the Oxus, William Moorcroft visited about 1824. Another to reach the region in the Great Game period, a naval officer called John Wood, came with an expedition to find the source of the river in 1839. He found modern-day Lake Zorkul, called it Lake Victoria, and proclaimed he had found the source. Then, the French explorer and geographer Thibaut Viné collected a lot of information about this area during five expeditions between 1856 and 1862.\n\nThe question of finding a route between the Oxus valley and India has been of concern historically. A direct route crosses extremely high mountain passes in the Hindu Kush and isolated areas like Kafiristan. Some in Britain feared that the Empire of Russia, which at the time wielded great influence over the Oxus area, would overcome these obstacles and find a suitable route through which to invade British India – but this never came to pass. The area was taken over by Russia during the Russian conquest of Turkestan.\n\nThe Soviet Union became the ruling power in the early 1920s and expelled Mohammed Alim Khan. It later put down the Basmachi movement and killed Ibrahim Bek. A large refugee population of Central Asians, including Turkmen, Tajiks and Uzbeks, fled to northern Afghanistan. In the 1960s and 1970s the Soviets started using the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya to irrigate extensive cotton fields in the Central Asian plain. Before this time, water from the rivers was already being used for agriculture, but not on this massive scale. The Qaraqum Canal, Karshi Canal, and Bukhara Canal were among the larger of the irrigation diversions built. However, the Main Turkmen Canal, which would have diverted water along the dry Uzboy River bed into central Turkmenistan, was never built. The 1970s, in the course of the Soviet war in Afghanistan, Soviet forces used the valley to invade Afghanistan through Termez. The Soviet Union fell in the 1990s and Central Asia split up into the many smaller countries that lie within or partially within the Amu Darya basin. \n\nDuring the Soviet era a resource-sharing system was instated in which Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan shared water originating from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers with Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan in summer. In return, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan received Kazakh, Turkmen, and Uzbek coal, gas, and electricity in winter. After the fall of the Soviet Union this system disintegrated and the Central Asian nations have failed to reinstate it. Inadequate infrastructure, poor water-management, and outdated irrigation methods all exacerbate the issue.\n\nThe Amu-Darya's delta was suggested as a potential site. A feasibility study was initiated to investigate if the area is suitable and if such an initiative would receive support from relevant decision makers. A viable tiger population of about 100 animals would require at least of large tracts of contiguous habitat with rich prey populations. Such habitat is not available at this stage and cannot be provided in the short term. The proposed region is therefore unsuitable for the reintroduction, at least at this stage.\n\nThe Oxus river, and Arnold's poem, fire the imaginations of the children who adventure with ponies over the moors of the West Country in the 1930s children's book \"The Far-Distant Oxus\". There were two sequels, \"Escape to Persia\" and \"Oxus in Summer\".\n\nRobert Byron's 1937 travelogue, \"The Road to Oxiana\", describes its author's journey from the Levant through Persia to Afghanistan, with the Oxus as his stated goal.\n\nGeorge MacDonald Fraser's \"Flashman at the Charge\", (1973), places Flashman on the Amu Darya and the Arral Sea during the (fictitious) Russian advance on India during The Great Game period.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3068", "title": "Islamic conquest of Afghanistan", "text": "Islamic conquest of Afghanistan\n\nThe Islamic conquest of Afghanistan (642–870) began in the middle of the 7th century after the Islamic conquest of Persia was completed, when Arab Muslims defeated the Sassanid Empire at the battles of Walaja, al-Qādisiyyah and Nahavand. The Muslim Arabs then began to move towards the lands east of Persia and in 652 captured the city, Herat. By 667, the Afghan area was under invasion by the Arabs but in 683 Kabul and other parts of Afghanistan fought with resistance and completely routed the invading army which was led by the Governor of Seistan. The near-complete conversion of Afghans to Islam was during the period of the Ghaznavids in the 10th century with Kafiristan holding out until Emir Abdur Rahman Khan conquered and forcibly converted them in the 1890s. Ethnic Arabs who have settled in Afghanistan, came to form the first community of Afghan Arabs.\n\nThe invasion of Persia was completed five years after the death of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, and all of the Persian territories came under Arab control, though pockets of tribal resistance continued for centuries in the Afghan territories. During the 7th century, Arab armies made their way into the region of Afghanistan from Khorasan with the new religion of Islam.\n\nThe area had been under the rule of the Buddhist and then Hindu dynasty called the Kabul Shahis since the 5th century. Muslims missionaries converted many people to Islam; however, the entire population did not convert, with repetitive revolts from the mountain tribes in the Afghan area taking place. The Hindu Shahi were defeated in the early part of the 10th century by Mahmud of Ghazna, who ruled between 998 and 1030. He also expelled the Hindu Shahi from Gandhara.\n\nIn 870, Ya'qub bin Laith as-Saffar, a local ruler from the Saffarid dynasty of Zaranj, Afghanistan, conquered most of present-day Afghanistan in the name of Islam. In many cases, the people he conquered had rebelled against their Islamic overlords and reverted to prior forms of worship.\n\nFrom the 8th century to the 9th century, many inhabitants of what is present-day Afghanistan and Pakistan were converted to Sunni Islam. It is surmised from the writings of Al Biruni that some Pashtuns living in Pakhtunkhwa (present-day western Pakistan) had not been completely converted. Al Biruni, writing in Tarikh al Hind, also alludes to the Pashtun tribes of Pakhtunkhwa as Hindus.\n\nVarious historical sources such as Martin Ewans, E.J. Brill and Farishta have recorded the introduction of Islam to Kabul and other parts of Afghanistan to the invasions of Mahmud of Ghazna\n\nAl-Idirisi (1100-1165/1166) testifies that until as late as the 12th century, a contract of investiture for every Hindu Shahi king was performed at Kabul and that here he was obliged to agree to certain ancient conditions which completed the contract.\n\nDuring the end of the 9th century, the Samanids extended its rule from Bukhara to as far south as the Indus River and west into parts of Persia. Although Arab Muslim intellectual life was still centered in Baghdad, Sunni Islam, predominated in the Samanid areas at this time. This period of time was considered an era of great cultural, intellectual, and artistic flourishing under the patronage of the Muslim Samanids. By the mid-10th century, the Samanid Dynasty had crumbled in the face of attacks from Turkish tribes to the north and from the Ghaznavids, a rising Turkic dynasty in Afghanistan.\n\nThe region was ruled by Hindu and Buddhist dynasty called the Kabul Shahis since the 5th century. Mountain tribe revolts hindered the process of converting the tribes. In 870, Ya'qub-i Laith Saffari, a local Persian ruler from the Saffarid dynasty of Zaranj, Afghanistan, conquered most of the cities of present-day Afghanistan in the name of Islam. \n\nDuring the 8th through the 9th centuries, many inhabitants of what is present-day Afghanistan and western Pakistan were converted to Sunni Islam. In some cases, however, people that were conquered by the Muslims would rebel and revert to prior forms of worship. The mountain areas were still not completely converted and remained largely by people of non-Muslim faiths. In a book called Hudud-al-Alam, written in 982, it mentions a village near Jalalabad, Afghanistan, where the local king used to have many Hindu, Muslim and Afghan wives. \n\nOut of the Samanid dynasty came the Ghaznavids, whose warriors forged the first great Islamic empire from Ghazni (Afghanistan) that spanned much of the Iranian plateau, Central Asia and conducted many successful raids into India. During the end of the 9th century, the Samanids extended its rule from Bukhara to as far south as the Indus River and west into most of Persia. By the mid-10th century, the Samanid dynasty had crumble in the face of attacks from Turkish tribes to the north and from the Ghaznavids, a rising Turkic Muslim dynasty in Afghanistan. Besides Turkic people, large part of the Ghaznavid Empire was made up of local Muslim Afghans from what is now Afghanistan and western parts of Pakistan.\n\nIt is surmised from the writings of Al Biruni that some Afghans who lived in west of India (modern-day Afghanistan) had not been completely converted to Islam.\n\nVarious historical sources such as Martin Ewans, E.J. Brill and Farishta have recorded that the complete conversion of Afghanistan, Pakistan to Islam was during the rule of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni. \n\nAl-Idirisi testifies that until as late as the 12th century, a contract of investiture for every Shahi king was performed at Kabul and that here he was obliged to agree to certain ancient conditions which completed the contract. The Ghaznavid military incursions assured the domination of Sunni Islam in what is now Afghanistan and western Pakistan. The most renowned of the dynasty's rulers was Mahmud of Ghazni, who consolidated control over the areas south of the Amu Darya then carried out devastating raids into India. With his booty from India, Mahmud built a great capital at Ghazni, founded universities, and patronized scholars. By the time of his death, Mahmud ruled a vast empire that stretched from Kurdistan to the entire Hindu Kush region as far east as the Punjab as well as territories far north of the Amu Darya. However, as occurred so often in this region, the demise in 1030 of this military genius who had expanded the empire to its farthest reaches was the death knell of the dynasty itself. The rulers of the Ghurids of Ghor in modern-day Afghanistan, captured and burned Ghazni in 1149, just as the Ghaznavids had once conquered Ghor. Not until 1186, however, was the last representative of the Ghaznavids uprooted by the Ghorids from his holdout in Lahore, in the Punjab.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3070", "title": "Durrani Empire", "text": "Durrani Empire\n\nThe Durrani Empire (), also called the Afghan Empire, was founded and built by Ahmad Shah Durrani with its capitals at Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Peshawar, Pakistan. At its maximum extent, the empire covered the nearly-entire modern states of Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as some parts of northeastern Iran, eastern Turkmenistan, northwestern India including the Kashmir region. It is recognized as one of the most powerful Muslim empires.\n\nAfter the death of Nader Shah in 1747, the region of Kandahar was claimed by Ahmad Shah Durrani. From there he began conquering Ghazni followed by Kabul. In 1749 the Mughal ruler had ceded sovereignty over what is now Pakistan and northwestern Punjab to the Afghans. Ahmad Shah then set out westward to take possession of Herat, which was ruled by Shahrokh Shah. He next sent an army to subdue the areas north of the Hindu Kush and in short order all the different tribes began joining his cause. Ahmad Shah and his forces invaded India four times, taking control of the Kashmir and the Punjab region. Early in 1757, he sacked Delhi, but permitted the Mughal dynasty to remain in nominal control as long as the ruler acknowledged Ahmad Shah's suzerainty over the Punjab, Sindh, and Kashmir. Durrani's forces instigated the Vaḍḍā Ghallūghārā when they killed thousands of Sikhs in the Punjab.\n\nAfter the death of Ahmad Shah in about 1772, his son Timur Shah became the next ruler of the Durrani dynasty who decided to make Kabul the new capital of the empire, and used Peshawar as the winter capital. The Durrani Empire is considered the foundation of the modern state of Afghanistan, and Pakistan. with Ahmad Shah Durrani being credited as \"Father of the Nation\".\n\nIn 1709 Mir Wais Hotak, chief of the Ghilji tribe of Kandahar Province, gained independence from the Safavid Persians. From 1722 to 1725, his son Mahmud Hotak briefly ruled large parts of Iran and declared himself as \"Shah of Persia\". However, the Hotak dynasty came to a complete end in 1738 after being toppled and banished by the Afsharids who were led by Nader Shah Afshar of Persia.\n\nThe year 1747 marks the definitive appearance of an Afghan political entity independent of both the Persian and Mughal empires. In October 1747 a loya jirga (grand council) concluded near the city of Kandahar with Ahmad Shah Durrani being selected as the new leader of the Afghans, thus the Durrani dynasty was founded. Despite being younger than the other contenders, Ahmad Shah had several overriding factors in his favor. He belonged to a respectable family of political background, especially since his father served as Governor of Herat who died in a battle defending the Afghans.\n\nOne of Ahmad Shah's first military action was the capture Ghazni from the Ghiljis, and then wresting Kabul from the local ruler. In 1749, the Mughal ruler was induced to cede Sindh, the Punjab region and the important trans Indus River to Ahmad Shah in order to save his capital from Afghan attack. Having thus gained substantial territories to the east without a fight, Ahmad Shah turned westward to take possession of Herat, which was ruled by Nader Shah Afshar's grandson, Shahrukh Afshar. Ahmad Shah next sent an army to subdue the areas north of the Hindu Kush mountains. In short order, the powerful army brought under its control the Tajik, Hazara, Uzbek, Turkmen, and other tribes of northern Afghanistan. Ahmad Shah invaded the remnants of the Mughal Empire a third time, and then a fourth, consolidating control over the Kashmir and Punjab regions, with Lahore being governed by Afghans. He sacked Delhi in 1757 but permitted the Mughal dynasty to remain in nominal control of the city as long as the ruler acknowledged Ahmad Shah's suzerainty over Punjab, Sindh, and Kashmir. Leaving his second son Timur Shah to safeguard his interests, Ahmad Shah left India to return to Afghanistan.\n\nAlarmed by the expansion of China's Qing Dynasty up to the western border of Kazakhstan, Ahmad Shah attempted to rally neighboring Muslim khanates and the Kazakhs to unite and attack China, ostensibly to liberate its western Muslim subjects. Ahmad Shah halted trade with Qing China and dispatched troops to Kokand. However, with his campaigns in India exhausting the state treasury, and with his troops stretched thin throughout Central Asia, Ahmad Shah lacked sufficient resources to do anything except to send envoys to Beijing for unsuccessful talks.\n\nThe Mughal power in northern India had been declining since the reign of Aurangzeb, who died in 1707; In 1751-52, \"Ahamdiya\" treaty was signed between the Marathas and Mughals, when Balaji Bajirao was the Peshwa. Through this treaty, the Marathas controlled virtually the whole of India from their capital at Pune and the Mughal rule was restricted only to Delhi (the Mughals remained the nominal heads of Delhi). Marathas were now straining to expand their area of control towards the Northwest of India. Ahmad Shah sacked the Mughal capital and withdrew with the booty he coveted. To counter the Afghans, Peshwa Balaji Bajirao sent Raghunathrao. He defeated the Rohillas and Afghan garrisons in Punjab and succeeded in ousting Timur Shah and his court from India and brought Lahore, Multan, Kashmir and other subahs on the Indian side of Attock under Maratha rule. Thus, upon his return to Kandahar in 1757, Ahmad was forced to return to India and face the formidable attacks of the Maratha Confederacy.\n\nAhmad Shah declared a jihad (or Islamic holy war) against the Marathas, and warriors from various Afghan tribes joined his army, including the Baloch people under the command of Khan of Kalat Mir Nasir I of Kalat. Early skirmishes were followed by victory for the Afghans against the smaller Maratha garrisons in Northwest India and by 1759 Ahmad Shah and his army had reached Lahore and were poised to confront the Marathas. By 1760, the Maratha groups had coalesced into a big enough army under the command of Sadashivrao Bhau. Once again, Panipat was the scene of a confrontation between two warring contenders for control of northern India. The Third Battle of Panipat (14 January 1761), fought between largely Muslim and largely Hindu armies was waged along a twelve-kilometer front. Despite decisively defeating the Marathas, what might have been Ahmad Shah's peaceful control of his domains was disrupted by many challenges. As far as losses are concerned, Afghans too suffered heavily in the Third Battle of Panipat. This weakened his grasp over Punjab which fell to the rising Sikh misls. There were rebellions in the north in the region of Bukhara.\n\nThe victory at Panipat was the high point of Ahmad Shah's—and Afghan—power. However, even prior to his death, the empire began to unravel. In 1762, Ahmad Shah crossed the passes from Afghanistan for the sixth time to subdue the Sikhs. From this time and on, the domination and control of the Empire began to loosen. He assaulted Lahore and, after taking their holy city of Amritsar, massacred thousands of Sikh inhabitants, destroying their revered Golden Temple. Within two years, the Sikhs rebelled again and rebuilt their holy city of Amritsar. Ahmad Shah tried several more times to subjugate the Sikhs permanently, but failed. Ahmad Shah also faced other rebellions in the north, and eventually he and the Uzbek Emir of Bukhara agreed that the Amu Darya would mark the division of their lands. A decade after the third Battle of Panipat, Marathas under the leadership of Mahadji Scindia entered and recaptured Delhi in 1771, cutting off Rohillas from the Durranis forever. Ahmad Shah retired to his home in the mountains east of Kandahar, where he died on April 14, 1773. He had succeeded to a remarkable degree in balancing tribal alliances and hostilities, and in directing tribal energies away from rebellion. He earned recognition as Ahmad Shah Baba, or \"Father\" of Afghanistan.\n\nAhmad Shah's successors governed so ineptly during a period of profound unrest that within fifty years of his death, the Durrani empire \"per se\" was at an end, and Afghanistan was embroiled in civil war. Much of the territory conquered by Ahmad Shah fell to others in this half century. By 1818, the Sadozai rulers who succeeded Ahmad Shah controlled little more than Kabul and the surrounding territory within a 160-kilometer radius. They not only lost the outlying territories but also alienated other tribes and lineages among the Durrani Pashtuns.\n\nAhmad Shah was succeeded by his son, Timur Shah, who had been deputed to administer his father's conquests in Northern India, but had been driven out by the Marathas. Upon Ahmad Shah's death, the Durrani chieftains only reluctantly accepted Timur's accession. Most of his reign was spent fighting a civil war and resisting rebellion; Timur was even forced to move his capital from Kandahar to Kabul due to the insurgency. Timur Shah proved an ineffectual ruler, during whose reign the Durrani empire began to crumble. He is notable for having had 24 sons, several of whom became rulers of the Durrani territories. Timur died in 1793 and was then succeeded by his fifth son Zaman Shah\n\nAfter the death of Timur Shah, three of his sons, the governors of Kandahar, Herat and Kabul, contended for the succession. Zaman Shah, governor of Kabul, held the field by virtue of being in control of the capital, and became shah at the age of twenty-three. Many of his half-brothers were imprisoned on their arrival in the capital for the purpose, ironically, of electing a new shah. The quarrels among Timur's descendants that through Afghanistan into turmoil also provided the pretext for the interventions of outside forces.\n\nThe efforts of the Sadozai heirs of Timur to impose a true monarchy on the truculent Pashtun tribes, and their efforts to rule absolutely and without the advice of the other major Pashtun tribal leaders, were ultimately unsuccessful. The Sikhs started rising to power in defense of the years of invasions of Punjab by the Afghanis. Zaman Shah was unsuccessful in subduing them. A young Sikh chief, Ranjit Singh, then succeeded in wresting power from Zaman's forces. Later when Zaman was blinded by his brother, it was Ranjit Singh who gave him asylum in Punjab.\n\nZaman's downfall was triggered by his attempts to consolidate power. Although it had been through the support of the Barakzai chief, Painda Khan Barakzai, that he had come to the throne, Zaman soon began to remove prominent Barakzai leaders from positions of power and replace them with men of his own lineage, the Sadozai. This upset the delicate balance of Durrani tribal politics that Ahmad Shah had established and may have prompted Painda Khan and other Durrani chiefs to plot against the shah. Painda Khan and the chiefs of the Nurzai and the Alizai Durrani clans were executed, as was the chief of the Qizilbash clan. Painda Khan's son fled to Iran and pledged the substantial support of his Barakzai followers to a rival claimant to the throne, Zaman's older brother, Mahmud Shah. The clans of the chiefs Zaman had executed joined forces with the rebels, and they took Kandahar without bloodshed.\n\nZeman Shah's overthrow in 1801 was not the end of civil strife in Afghanistan, but the beginning of even greater violence. Mahmud Shah's first reign lasted for only two years before he was replaced by Shuja Shah.\n\nYet another of Timur Shah's sons, Shuja Shah (or Shah Shuja), ruled for only six years. On June 7, 1809, Shuja Shah signed a treaty with the British, which included a clause stating that he would oppose the passage of foreign troops through his territories. This agreement, the first Afghan pact with a Europea power, stipulated joint action in case of Franco-Persian aggression against Afghan or British dominions. Only a few weeks after signing the agreement, Shuja was deposed by his predecessor, Mahmud. Much later, he was reinstated by the British, ruling during 1839–1842. Two of his sons also ruled for a brief period in 1842.\n\nMahmud's second reign lasted nine years. Mahmud alienated the Barakzai, especially Fateh Khan, the son of Painda Khan, who was eventually seized and blinded. Revenge would later be sought and obtained by Fateh Khan's youngest brother, Dost Mohammad Khan.\n\nAli Shah was another son of Timur Shah. He seized power for a brief period in 1818-19.\n\nAyub Shah was another son of Timur Shah, who deposed Sultan Ali Shah. He was himself later deposed, and presumably killed in 1823. The loss of Kashmir during his reign opened a new chapter in South Asian history.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3071", "title": "Aimaq people", "text": "Aimaq people\n\nThe Aimaq (), also transliterated as \"Aimak\" or \"Aymaq\", are a collection of Persian-speaking nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes. Aimaqs are found mostly throughout Pakistan in the Kyber and Balochistan region and in the West Central highlands of Afghanistan, immediately to the north of Herat, and also to a much lesser amount in the Khorasan Province of Iran. They speak a number of subdialects of the Aimaq dialect of Persian, however some southern groups of Taymani and Maleki Aymaqs have adopted Pashto.\n\nAimaks were originally known as \"chahar\" (\"four\") Aymaqs: the Taimani (the main element in the population of Ghor), the Firozkohi, the Temuri, and the Jamshidi. Other sources state that the Aimaq Hazara are one of the \"Chahar\", with the Temuri instead being of the \"lesser Aimaqs\" or \"Aimaq-e digar\" (\"other Aimaqs\") along with the Tahiri, Zuri, Maleki, and Mishmast.\n\nAymāq is a Turkic and Mongolic word that means \"tribe\" or \"grazing territory\". Aimaq Hazara and Taimuri are most Mongoloid of the Aimaqs. The Temuri and Aimaq Hazaras live in yurts, whereas other Aimaqs live in traditional Afghan black tents.\n\nEstimates of the Aimaq population vary between 250,000 and 500,000. They are largely Sunni Muslims, in contrast to the Hazara, who are mostly Shia Muslims. The Temuri Aimaqs are of Mongolian origin, apparent in their physical appearance and their housing (Mongolian-style yurts). However, the Taimanis, Ferozkohis, and Jamshidis are of Iranian origin, and refer to themselves as Tajik; the majority of the Aimaqs in Afghanistan are of these latter three sub-groups.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3072", "title": "Arcturus", "text": "Arcturus\n\nArcturus (), also designated Alpha Boötis (α Boötis, abbreviated Alpha Boo, α Boo), is the brightest star in the constellation of Boötes, the fourth-brightest in the night sky, and the brightest in the northern celestial hemisphere. Together with Spica and Denebola (or Regulus, depending on the source), Arcturus is part of the Spring Triangle asterism and, by extension, also of the Great Diamond along with the star Cor Caroli.\n\nRelatively close at 36.7 light-years from the Sun, Arcturus is a red giant of spectral type K0III—an ageing star around 7.1 billion years old that has used up its core hydrogen and moved off the main sequence. It is 1.08 ± 0.06 times as massive as the Sun, but has expanded to 25.4 ± 0.2 times its diameter and is around 170 times as luminous.\n\n\"α Boötis\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Boötis\") is the star's Bayer designation.\n\nThe traditional name \"Arcturus\" derives from Ancient Greek Ἀρκτοῦρος (\"Arktouros\") and means \"Guardian of the Bear\", ultimately from ἄρκτος (\"arktos\"), \"bear\" and οὖρος (\"ouros\"), \"watcher, guardian\". It has been known by this name since at least the time of Hesiod. This is a reference to its being the brightest star in the constellation of Boötes (of which it forms the left foot), which is next to the constellations of Ursa Major and Ursa Minor, the Greater and Lesser Bears.\n\nIn 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Arcturus\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\n\nWith an apparent visual magnitude of −0.05, Arcturus is the brightest star in the Northern celestial hemisphere and the fourth-brightest star in the night sky, after Sirius (−1.46  apparent magnitude), Canopus (−0.72) and Alpha Centauri (−0.27). However, Alpha Centauri is a binary star, whose unresolved components to the naked eye are both fainter than Arcturus. This makes Arcturus the third-brightest individual star, just ahead of Alpha Centauri A, whose apparent magnitude is −0.01. The French mathematician and astronomer Jean-Baptiste Morin observed Arcturus in the daytime with a telescope (a first for any star other than the Sun and supernovae) in 1635, and Arcturus has been seen at or just before sunset with the naked eye.\n\nArcturus is visible from both Earth's hemispheres as it is located 19° north of the celestial equator. The star culminates at midnight on 27 April, and at 9PM on June 10 being visible during the late northern spring or the southern autumn. From the northern hemisphere, an easy way to find Arcturus is to follow the arc of the handle of the Big Dipper (Plough). By continuing in this path, one can find Spica, \"Arc to Arcturus, then spike to Spica\".\n\nPtolemy described Arcturus as \"subrufa\" (\"slightly red\"): it has a B-V color index of +1.23, roughly midway between Pollux (B-V +1.00) and Aldebaran (B-V +1.54).\n\nEta Boötis, or Muphrid, is only 3.3 light-years distant from Arcturus, and would have a visual magnitude −2.5, whereas an observer on the former system would find Arcturus as bright as Venus as seen from Earth.\n\nBased upon an annual parallax shift of 88.83 milliarcseconds as measured by the Hipparcos satellite, Arcturus is from the Sun (the margin of error is 0.54 milliarcseconds, translating to a margin of error of ±).\n\nArcturus is a type K0 III red giant star. With an absolute magnitude of −0.30 it is, together with Vega and Sirius, one of the most luminous stars in the Sun's neighborhood. It is about 110 times brighter than the Sun in visible light wavelengths, but this underestimates its strength as much of the light it gives off is in the infrared; total (bolometric) power output is about 180 times that of the Sun. The lower output in visible light is due to a lower efficacy as the star has a lower surface temperature than the Sun. With a near-infrared J band magnitude of −2.2, only Betelgeuse (−2.9) and R Doradus (−2.6) are brighter.\n\nAs the brightest K-type giant in the sky, it was the subject of an atlas of its visible spectrum, made from photographic spectra taken with the coudé spectrograph of the Mt. Wilson 2.5m telescope published in 1968, a key reference work for stellar spectroscopy. Subsequent spectral atlases\n\nAs a single star, the mass of Arcturus cannot be measured directly, but models suggest it is slightly larger than that of the Sun. Evolutionary matching to the observed physical parameters gives a mass of , while the oxygen isotope ratio for a first Dredge-up star gives a mass of .\n\nArcturus has been estimated to be around 6 billion to 8.5 billion years old, and is ascending the red giant branch until it accumulates a large enough degenerate helium core to ignite the helium flash. It has likely exhausted the hydrogen from its core and is now in its active hydrogen shell burning phase. It will continue to expand before entering horizontal branch stage of its life cycle.\n\nAs one of the brightest stars in the sky, Arcturus has been the subject of a number of studies in the emerging field of asteroseismology. Belmonte and colleagues carried out a radial velocity (Doppler shift of spectral lines) study of the star in April and May 1988, which showed variability with a frequency of the order of a few microhertz, the highest peak corresponding to 4.3 μHz (2.7 days) with an amplitude of 60 ms, with a frequency separation of c. 5 μHz. They suggested that the most plausible explanation for the variability of Arcturus is stellar oscillations.\n\nAsteroseismological measurements allow direct calculation of the mass and radius, giving values of and . This form of modelling is still relatively inaccurate, but a useful check on other models.\n\nAstronomers term \"metals\" those elements with higher atomic numbers than helium. Arcturus has an enrichment of alpha elements relative to iron but only about a third of solar metallicity, Arcturus is possibly a Population II star.\n\nArcturus has a high proper motion, two arcseconds a year, greater than any first magnitude star other than α Centauri. It is moving rapidly () relative to the Solar System, and is now almost at its closest point to the Sun. Closest approach will happen in about 4,000 years, when the star will be a few hundredths of a light-year closer to Earth than it is today. Arcturus is thought to be an old disk star, and appears to be moving with a group of 52 other such stars, known as the Arcturus stream.\n\nIn antiquity, Arcturus was closer to the centre of the constellation.\n\n\"Hipparcos\" also suggested that Arcturus is a binary star, with the companion about twenty times dimmer than the primary and orbiting close enough to be at the very limits of humans' current ability to make it out. Recent results remain inconclusive, but do support the marginal \"Hipparcos\" detection of a binary companion.\n\nIn 1993, radial velocity measurements of Aldebaran, Arcturus and Pollux showed that Arcturus exhibited a long-period radial velocity oscillation, which could be interpreted as a \"substellar companion\". This substellar object would be nearly 12 times the mass of Jupiter and be located roughly at the same orbital distance from Arcturus as the Earth is from the Sun, at 1.1 Astronomical Units. However, all three stars surveyed showed similar oscillations yielding similar companion masses, and the authors concluded that the variation was likely to be intrinsic to the star rather than due to the gravitational effect of a companion. So far no substellar companion has been confirmed.\n\nIn Arabic, Arcturus is one of two stars called \"al-simāk\" \"the uplifted one\" (the other is Spica). Arcturus is specified as السماك الرامح \"as-simāk ar-rāmiħ\" \"the uplifted one of the lancer\". The term \"Al Simak Al Ramih\" has appeared in Al Achsasi Al Mouakket catalogue (translated into Latin as \"Al Simak Lanceator\").\n\nThis has been variously romanized in the past, leading to obsolete variants such as \"Aramec\" and \"Azimech\". For example, the name \"Alramih\" is used in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Treatise on the Astrolabe\" (1391). Another Arabic name is \"Haris-el-sema\", from \"حارس السماء\" \"ħāris al-samā’\" \"the keeper of heaven\". or \" حارس الشمال\" \"ħāris al-shamāl’\" \"the keeper of north\".\n\nArcturus was once again called by its classical name from the Renaissance onwards.\n\nIn Chinese astronomy, Arcturus is called \"Da Jiao\" (), because it is the brightest star in the Chinese constellation called \"Jiao Xiu\" (). Later it become a part of another constellation \"Kang Xiu\" ().\n\nIn Indian Astrology or Vedic Astrology or Sidereal Astrology, Arcturus is called \"Swati\" which is a word meaning \"very beneficent\" derived from the language Sanskrit. It is the eponymous star of one of the nakshatras (lunar mansions) of Hindu astrology.\n\nIn Indonesia, Arcturus is called \"Bintang Biduk\" (star of boat).\n\nIn Japan, Arcturus is called \"Mugi-boshi\" (麦星), meaning \"star of wheat\".\n\nThe Wotjobaluk Koori people of southeastern Australia knew Arcturus as \"Marpean-kurrk\", mother of \"Djuit\" (Antares) and another star in Bootes, \"Weet-kurrk\" (Muphrid). Its appearance in the north signified the arrival of the larvae of the wood ant (a food item) in spring. The beginning of summer was marked by the star's setting with the Sun in the west and the disappearance of the larvae. The people of Milingimbi Island in Arnhem Land saw Arcturus and Muphrid as man and woman, and took the appearance of Arcturus at sunrise as a sign to go and harvest \"rakia\" or spikerush. The Wailwun of northern New South Wales knew Arcturus as \"Guembila\" \"red\".\n\nIn Inuit astronomy, Arcturus is called the Old Man (\"Uttuqalualuk\" in Inuit) and The First Ones (\"Sivulliik\" in Inuit).\n\nThe Mi'kmaq of eastern Canada saw Arcturus as \"Kookoogwéss\", the owl.\n\nArcturus had several names that described its significance to indigenous Polynesians. In the Society Islands, Arcturus, called \"Ana-tahua-taata-metua-te-tupu-mavae\" (\"a pillar to stand by\"), was one of the ten \"pillars of the sky\", bright stars that represented the ten heavens of the Tahitian afterlife. In Hawaii, the pattern of Boötes was called \"Hoku-iwa\", meaning \"stars of the frigate bird\". This constellation marked the path for Hawaiiloa on his return to Hawaii from the South Pacific Ocean. The Hawaiians called Arcturus \"Hoku-leʻa\". It was equated to the Tuamotuan constellation \"Te Kiva\", meaning \"frigate-bird\", which could either represent the figure of Boötes or just Arcturus. However, Arcturus may instead be the Tuamotuan star called \"Turu\". The Hawaiian name for Arcturus as a single star was likely \"Hoku-leʻa\", which means \"star of gladness\", or \"clear star\". In the Marquesas Islands, Arcturus was probably called \"Tau-tou\" and was the star that ruled the month approximating January. The Maori and Moriori called it \"Tautoru\", a variant of the Marquesan name and a name shared with Orion's Belt.\n\nAs one of the brightest stars in the sky, Arcturus has been significant to observers since antiquity.\n\nPrehistoric Polynesian navigators knew Arcturus as \"Hōkūleʻa\", the \"Star of Joy\". Arcturus is the zenith star of the Hawaiian Islands. Using Hōkūleʻa and other stars, the Polynesians launched their double-hulled canoes from Tahiti and the Marquesas Islands. Traveling east and north they eventually crossed the equator and reached the latitude at which Arcturus would appear directly overhead in the summer night sky. Knowing they had arrived at the exact latitude of the island chain, they sailed due west on the trade winds to landfall. If Hōkūleʻa could be kept directly overhead, they landed on the southeastern shores of the Big Island of Hawaiʻi. For a return trip to Tahiti the navigators could use Sirius, the zenith star of that island. Since 1976, the Polynesian Voyaging Society's \"Hōkūle‘a\" has crossed the Pacific Ocean many times under navigators who have incorporated this wayfinding technique in their non-instrument navigation.\n\nIn ancient Mesopotamia, it was linked to the god Enlil, and also known as Shudun, \"yoke\", or SHU-PA of unknown derivation in the \"Three Stars Each\" Babylonian star catalogues and later MUL.APIN around 1100 BC.\n\nIn Ancient Rome, the star's celestial activity was supposed to portend tempestuous weather, and a personification of the star acts as narrator of the prologue to Plautus' comedy \"Rudens\" (circa 211 BC).\n\nIn the Hebrew scriptures Arcturus is referred to in Job 38:32.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, Arcturus was considered a Behenian fixed star and attributed to the stone Jasper and the plantain herb. Cornelius Agrippa listed its kabbalistic sign under the alternate name \"Alchameth\".\n\nThe Karandavyuha sutra, compiled at the end of the 4th century or beginning of the 5th century C.E., names one of Avalokiteshvara's meditative absorptions as \"The face of Arcturus\".\n\nArcturus achieved fame when its light was rumored to be the mechanism used to open the 1933 Chicago World's Fair. The star was chosen as it was thought that light from Arcturus had started its journey at about the time of the previous Chicago World's Fair in 1893 (at 36.7 light-years away, and the light actually started in 1896.\n\nThe star is featured in the 1977 documentary film \"Powers of Ten\", in which it is seen when a camera zooms from Earth to the whole of the known universe.\n\nIn the 2016 Sci-Fi film Passengers, the starship Avalon slingshots around a red giant called Arcturus about 31 years after leaving Earth.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3074", "title": "Androphagi", "text": "Androphagi\n\nAndrophagi (Ancient Greek : \"Ἀνδροφάγοι\" for \"man-eaters\") was an ancient nation of cannibals north of Scythia (according to Herodotus), probably in the forests between the upper waters of the Dnepr and Don. These people may have assisted the Scythians when King Darius the Great led a Persian invasion into what is now Southern Russia to punish the Scythians for their raids into the Achaemenid Empire.\n\nHerodotus first wrote of \"andropophagi\" in his \"Histories\", where he described them as one of several tribes near Scythia. An extra note indicates that the \"andropophagi\" are cannibals, as reflected in their name:\n\nPliny the Elder later wrote in his \"Naturalis Historia\" that the same cannibals near Scythia wore the scalps of men on their chest.\n\nHistorian Marija Gimbutas has hypothesized that \"Androphagoi\" is a Greek translation of *mard-xwaar \"man-eater\" in the old North Iranian language of the Scythians. From *mard-xwaar one can derive \"Mordva\" or \"Mordvin\", the Russian name of the Finno-Ugrian Erzya and Moksha peoples of east-central European Russia. From Herodotus we can deduce a location for the Androphagoi that is approximately the same as that occupied by the modern Mordvins.\n\n"}
{"id": "3075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3075", "title": "Albert Brooks", "text": "Albert Brooks\n\nAlbert Lawrence Brooks (born Albert Lawrence Einstein; July 22, 1947) is an American actor, filmmaker, author and comedian. He received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor for 1987's \"Broadcast News\" and was widely praised for his performance in the 2011 film \"Drive\". His voice acting credits include Marlin in \"Finding Nemo\" (2003) and \"Finding Dory\" (2016), and recurring guest voices for \"The Simpsons\", including Russ Cargill in \"The Simpsons Movie\" (2007). He has directed, written, and starred in several comedy films, such as \"Modern Romance\" (1981), \"Lost in America\" (1985), and \"Defending Your Life\" (1991). He is also the author of \"2030: The Real Story of What Happens to America\" (2011).\n\nBrooks was born in Beverly Hills, California, the son of Thelma Leeds (née Goodman), a singer and actress, and Harry Parke, a radio comedian who performed on Eddie Cantor's radio program and was known as Parkyakarkus. His brothers are comedic actor Bob Einstein, better known as a character he created named \"Super Dave Osborne\", and for a recurring role in \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\"; and Cliff Einstein, a partner and longtime chief creative officer at Los Angeles advertising agency Dailey & Associates. His half-brother was Charles Einstein (1926–2007), a writer for such television programs as \"Playhouse 90\" and \"Lou Grant\". Brooks is Jewish; his grandparents emigrated from Austria and Russia. He grew up among show business families in southern California, attending Beverly Hills High School with Richard Dreyfuss and Rob Reiner.\n\nBrooks attended Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, but dropped out after one year to focus on his comedy career. By the age of 19, he had changed his professional name to Albert Brooks, joking that \"the real Albert Einstein changed his name to sound more intelligent\". He began a comedy career that quickly made him a regular on variety and talk shows during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Brooks led a new generation of self-reflective baby-boomer comics appearing on NBC's \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\". His onstage persona, that of an egotistical, narcissistic, nervous comic, an ironic showbiz insider who punctured himself before an audience by disassembling his mastery of comedic stagecraft, influenced other '70s post-modern comedians, including Steve Martin, Martin Mull, and Andy Kaufman.\n\nAfter two successful comedy albums, \"Comedy Minus One\" (1973) and the Grammy Award–nominated \"A Star Is Bought\" (1975), Brooks left the stand-up circuit to try his hand as a filmmaker. He had already made his first short film, \"The Famous Comedians School\", a satiric short and an early example of the mockumentary subgenre that appeared on the PBS show The Great American Dream Machine in 1972.\n\nIn 1975, he directed six short films for the first season of NBC's \"Saturday Night Live\":\n\n\nIn 1976 he appeared in his first mainstream film role, in Martin Scorsese's landmark \"Taxi Driver\"; Scorsese allowed Brooks to improvise much of his dialogue. The role reflected Brooks's decision to move to Los Angeles to enter the film business. In an interview, Brooks mentioned a conversation he'd had with \"Taxi Driver\" screenwriter Paul Schrader, in which Schrader said that Brooks's character was the only one in the movie that he could not \"understand\" – a remark that Brooks found amusing, as the movie's antihero was a psychotic loner.\n\nBrooks directed his first feature film, \"Real Life\", in 1979. The film, in which Brooks (playing a version of himself) obnoxiously films a typical suburban family in an effort to win both an Oscar and a Nobel Prize, was a sendup of PBS's \"An American Family\" documentary. It has also been viewed as foretelling the future emergence of reality television. Brooks also made a cameo appearance in the film \"Private Benjamin\" (1980), starring Goldie Hawn. (He also got starring credits in the film, even though his character dies within roughly the first half-hour of the film.)\n\nThrough the 1980s and 1990s, Brooks co-wrote (with longtime collaborator Monica Johnson), directed and starred in a series of well-received comedies, playing variants on his standard neurotic and self-obsessed character. These include 1981's \"Modern Romance\", where Brooks played a film editor desperate to win back his ex-girlfriend (Kathryn Harrold). The film received a limited release and ultimately grossed under $3 million domestically, but was well received by critics, with one reviewer commenting that the film was \"not Brooks at his best, but still amusing\". His best-received film, \"Lost in America\" (1985), featured Brooks and Julie Hagerty as a couple who leave their yuppie lifestyle and drop out of society to live in a motor home as they have always dreamed of doing, meeting disappointment.\n\nBrooks's \"Defending Your Life\" (1991) placed his lead character in the afterlife, put on trial to justify his human fears and determine his cosmic fate. Critics responded to the offbeat premise and the chemistry between Brooks and Meryl Streep, as his post-death love interest. His later efforts did not find large audiences, but still retained Brooks's touch as a filmmaker. He garnered positive reviews for \"Mother\" (1996), which starred Brooks as a middle-aged writer moving back home to resolve tensions between himself and his mother (Debbie Reynolds). 1999's \"The Muse\" featured Brooks as a down-and-out Hollywood screenwriter using the services of an authentic muse (Sharon Stone) for inspiration. In an interview with Brooks with regards to \"The Muse\", Gavin Smith wrote, \"Brooks's distinctive filmmaking style is remarkably discreet and unemphatic; he has a light, deft touch, with a classical precision and economy, shooting and cutting his scenes in smooth, seamless successions of medium shots, with clean, high-key lighting.\"\n\nBrooks has appeared as a guest voice on \"The Simpsons\" five times during its run (always under the name \"A. Brooks\"), and is described as the best guest star in the show's history by IGN, particularly for his role as supervillain Hank Scorpio in the episode \"You Only Move Twice\".\n\nBrooks also acted in other writers' and directors' films during the 1980s and 1990s. He had a cameo in the opening scene of \"\", playing a driver whose passenger (Dan Aykroyd) has a shocking secret. In James L. Brooks's hit \"Broadcast News\" (1987), Albert Brooks was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for playing an insecure, supremely ethical network TV reporter, who offers the rhetorical question, \"Wouldn't this be a great world if insecurity and desperation made us more attractive?\" He also won positive notices for his role in 1998's \"Out of Sight\", playing an untrustworthy banker and ex-convict.\n\nBrooks received positive reviews for his portrayal of a dying retail store owner who befriends disillusioned teen Leelee Sobieski in \"My First Mister\" (2001). Brooks continued his voiceover work in Pixar's \"Finding Nemo\" (2003), as the voice of Marlin, one of the film's protagonists; \"Nemo\" is Brooks's largest grossing film to date.\n\nIn 2005, his film \"Looking for Comedy in the Muslim World\" was dropped by Sony Pictures due to their desire to change the title. Warner Independent Pictures purchased the film and gave it a limited release in January 2006; the film received mixed reviews and a low box office gross. The movie goes back to the days of Brooks's \"Real Life\", as Brooks once again plays himself, a filmmaker commissioned by the U.S. government to see what makes the Muslim people laugh, thus sending him on a tour of India and Pakistan.\n\nIn 2006 he appeared in the documentary film \"Wanderlust\" as David Howard from \"Lost in America\". The documentary included many other well known people. In 2007, he continued his long term collaboration with \"The Simpsons\" by voicing Russ Cargill, the central antagonist of \"The Simpsons Movie\".\n\nHe has played Lenny Botwin, Nancy Botwin's estranged father-in-law, on Showtime's television series \"Weeds\". St. Martin's Press published his first novel, \"2030: The Real Story of What Happens to America\", on May 10, 2011.\n\nIn 2011, Brooks co-starred as the vicious gangster Bernie Rose, the main antagonist in the motion picture \"Drive\", alongside Ryan Gosling and Carey Mulligan, a role that has been given much critical praise and positive reviews, with several critics proclaiming Brooks' performance as one of the film's best aspects. After receiving awards and nominations from several film festivals and critic groups, but not an Academy Award nomination, Brooks responded humorously on Twitter, \"And to the Academy: ‘You don't like me. You really don't like me’.\"\n\nIn 2016, Brooks reprised the role of Marlin from Finding Nemo in the 2016 sequel \"Finding Dory\" and voiced Tiberius, a curmudgeonly red-tailed hawk in \"The Secret Life of Pets\".\n\nIn 1997, Brooks married website designer Kimberly Shlain, daughter of surgeon and writer Leonard Shlain. They have two children, Jacob and Claire, and reside in Santa Monica, California.\n\n"}
{"id": "3076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3076", "title": "Antares", "text": "Antares\n\nAntares (), also designated Alpha Scorpii (α Scorpii, abbreviated Alpha Sco, α Sco), is on average the fifteenth-brightest star in the night sky, and the brightest star in the constellation of Scorpius. Distinctly reddish when viewed with the naked eye, Antares is a slow irregular variable star that ranges in brightness from apparent magnitude +0.6 to +1.6. Often referred to as \"the heart of the scorpion\", Antares is flanked by Sigma and Tau Scorpii in the centre of the constellation.\n\nClassified as a red supergiant of spectral type M1.5Iab, Antares is one of the largest known stars. It is the brightest, most massive, and most evolved stellar member of the nearest OB association (the Scorpius–Centaurus Association). Antares is a member of the Upper Scorpius subgroup of the Scorpius–Centaurus Association, which contains thousands of stars with mean age 11 million years at a distance of approximately . It is thought to be between 15 and 18 times as massive as the Sun, and have around 883 times its radius. Hence, if placed in the center of the Solar System, its outer surface would lie between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.\n\n\"α Scorpii\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Scorpii\") is the star's Bayer designation. It also has the Flamsteed designation 21 Scorpii, as well as catalogue designations such as HR 6134 in the Bright Star Catalogue and HD 148478 in the Henry Draper Catalogue. As a prominent infrared source, it appears in the Two Micron All-Sky Survey catalogue as 2MASS J16292443-2625549 and the Two Micron All-Sky Survey catalogue as IRAS 16262-2619. It is also catalogued as a double star WDS J16294-2626 and CCDM J16294-2626.\n\nThe traditional name \"Antares\" derives from the Ancient Greek , meaning \"equal to-Ares\" (\"equal to-Mars\"), due to the similarity of its reddish hue to the appearance of the planet Mars. The comparison of Antares with Mars may have originated with early Mesopotamian astronomers. However, some scholars have speculated that the star may have been named after Antar, or Antarah ibn Shaddad, the Arab warrior-hero celebrated in the pre-Islamic poems Mu'allaqat. In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organised a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardise proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Antares\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\n\nAntares is a variable star and is listed in the General Catalogue of Variable Stars but as a Bayer-designated star it does not have a separate variable star designation.\n\nAntares is a supergiant star with a stellar classification of M1.5Iab. With a radius that is approximately 883 times that of the Sun, it is one of largest stars, if placed in the center of the Solar System, its outer surface would lie between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Based upon parallax measurements, Antares is approximately from the Sun. Its visual luminosity is about 10,000 times that of the Sun, but because the star radiates a considerable part of its energy in the infrared part of the spectrum, the bolometric luminosity equals roughly 65,000 times that of the Sun. The mass of the star has been calculated to be in the range of 15 to 18 solar masses. A 2012 analysis by Pecaut and colleagues comparing the effective temperature and luminosity of Antares to theoretical evolutionary tracks for massive stars which include rotation an initial progenitor mass of approximately 17 solar masses and an age of 12 million years. Initial mass must also take into account the mass loss from powerful winds, and this would yield a less massive star not stated in this reference paper.\n\nThe size of Antares may be calculated using its parallax and angular diameter. The parallax angle is given in the adjacent box, and the angular diameter is known from lunar occultation measurements (41.3 ± 0.1 milliarcseconds). This implies a radius of 890 ± 150 solar radii at this distance. By analysing its radial velocity from its spectrum, Pugh and colleagues calculated a period of 5.93 ± 0.01 years and considered whether this change was orbital or pulsational. If the latter, then the radius of the star changes by 165 ± 22 solar radii (19% ± 4%). However, if this were the case, Antares' brightness would vary by a greater amount.\n\nAntares is a type \"LC\" slow irregular variable star, whose apparent magnitude slowly varies from +0.6 to +1.6.\n\nAntares is visible in the sky all night around May 31 of each year, when the star is at opposition to the Sun. At this time, Antares rises at dusk and sets at dawn as seen at the equator. For approximately two to three weeks on either side of November 30, Antares is not visible in the night sky, because it is near conjunction with the Sun; this period of invisibility is longer in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere, since the star's declination is significantly south of the celestial equator.\n\nAntares is one of the four first magnitude stars that lies within 6.5° of the ecliptic (the others are Spica, Regulus and Aldebaran) and therefore can be occulted by the Moon. It can also, rarely, be occulted by Venus. The last occultation of Antares by Venus took place on September 17, 525 BC; the next one will take place on November 17, 2400. Other planets have not occulted Antares in the last millennium nor will they do so in the next millennium, as they pass as a result of their actual node position and inclination always northward of Antares. On 31 July 2009, Antares was occulted by the Moon. The event was visible in much of southern Asia and the Middle East. Every year around December 2 the Sun passes 5° north of Antares.\n\nAntares has a magnitude 5.5 companion star, Antares B, that changed from an angular separation (from its primary, Antares A) of 3.3 arcseconds in 1854 to 2.86 arcseconds in 1990. It was first observed by Scottish astronomer James William Grant FRSE while in India on 23 July 1844. The last is equal to a projected separation of about 529 astronomical units (au) at the estimated distance of Antares, giving a minimum value for the separation of the pair. Spectroscopic examination of the energy states in the outflow of matter from the companion star suggests that it is about 224 au beyond the primary. Antares B is a blue-white main-sequence star of spectral type B2.5V; it also has numerous unusual spectral lines suggesting it has been polluted by matter ejected by Antares A.\n\nThe companion star is normally difficult to see in small telescopes due to glare from Antares A, but can sometimes be seen in apertures over . The companion is often described as green, but this is probably either a contrast effect, or the result of the mixing of light from the two stars when they are seen together through a telescope and are too close to be completely resolved. Antares B can sometimes be observed with a small telescope for a few seconds during lunar occultations while Antares A is hidden by the Moon. It was discovered by Johann Tobias Bürg during one such occultation on April 13, 1819, but until its existence was confirmed in 1846 it was thought by some to be merely the light of Antares viewed through the Moon's atmosphere (which at the time was theorised to exist). When observed by itself during such an occultation, the companion appears a profound blue or bluish-green color.\n\nThe orbit of the companion star is poorly known, as attempts to analyse the radial velocity of Antares need to be unravelled from the star's own pulsations. Orbital periods are possible within a range of 1,200 to 2,562 years.\n\nAntares, like the similarly-sized red giant Betelgeuse in the constellation Orion, will almost certainly explode as a supernova, probably within the next few hundred thousand years. For a few months, the Antares supernova could be as bright as the full moon and be visible in daytime.\n\nIn the Babylonian star catalogues dating from at least 1100 BCE, Antares was called GABA GIR.TAB, \"the Breast of the Scorpion\". In MUL.APIN, which dates between 1100 and 700 BC, it is one of the stars of Ea in the southern sky and marks breast of the Scorpion goddess Ishhara. Later names that translate as \"the Heart of Scorpion\" include ' from the Arabic '. This had been directly translated from the Ancient Greek '. ' translated above Greek name into Latin.\"\n\nIn ancient Mesopotamia, Antares may have been known by the following names: Urbat, Bilu-sha-ziri (\"the Lord of the Seed\"), Kak-shisa (\"the Creator of Prosperity\"), Dar Lugal (\"The King\"), Masu Sar (\"the Hero and the King\"), and Kakkab Bir (\"the Vermilion Star\"). In ancient Egypt, Antares represented the scorpion goddess Serket (and was the symbol of Isis in the pyramidal ceremonies).\n\nIn Persia, Antares was known as \"Satevis\", one of the four \"royal stars\". In India, it with Sigma and Tau Scorpii were Jyeshthā (the eldest or biggest), one of the \"nakshatra\" (Hindu lunar mansions). The ancient Chinese called Antares \"()\", because it was the second-brightest star of the mansion \"Xin\" (心). It was the national star of the Shang Dynasty, and it was sometimes referred to as () because of its reddish appearance.\n\nThe Māori people of New Zealand call Antares \"Rehua\", and regard it as the chief of all the stars. Rehua is father of \"Puanga/Puaka\" (Rigel), an important star in the calculation of the Māori calendar. The Wotjobaluk Koori people of Victoria, Australia, knew Antares as \"Djuit\", son of \"Marpean-kurrk\" (Arcturus); the stars on each side represented his wives. The Kulin Kooris saw Antares (\"Balayang\") as the brother of \"Bunjil\" (Altair).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3077", "title": "Aldebaran", "text": "Aldebaran\n\nAldebaran, designated Alpha Tauri (α Tauri, abbreviated Alpha Tau, α Tau), is an orange giant star located about 65 light years from the Sun in the zodiac constellation of Taurus. It is the brightest star in its constellation and usually the fourteenth-brightest star in the nighttime sky, though it varies slowly in brightness between magnitude 0.75 and 0.95. It is likely that Aldebaran hosts a planet several times the size of Jupiter.\n\nThe planetary exploration probe Pioneer 10 is currently heading in the general direction of the star and should make its closest approach in about two million years.\n\n\"Alpha Tauri\" is the star's Bayer designation. The name \"Aldebaran\" is Arabic (' ') and means \"the Follower\", presumably because it rises near and soon after the Pleiades. In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Aldebaran\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\n\nIn Persia it was known as Tascheter.\n\nThe Romans called it \".\n\nIn the Middle Ages it was sometimes called Cor Tauri (the Heart of the Bull/Taurus).\n\nJohn Gower refers to it as Aldeboran.\n\nIn Chinese it is known as (\", the Fifth Star of the Net).\n\nIn Hindu astronomy it is identified as the lunar mansion Rohini (\"the red one\") and as one of the twenty-seven daughters of Daksha and the wife of the god Chandra (moon).\n\nThis easily seen and striking star in its suggestive asterism is a popular subject for ancient and modern myths.\n\nOn 11 March AD 509, a lunar occultation of Aldebaran was observed in Athens, Greece. English astronomer Edmund Halley studied the timing of this event, and in 1718 concluded that Aldebaran must have changed position since that time, moving several minutes of arc further to the north. This, as well as observations of the changing positions of stars Sirius and Arcturus, led to the discovery of proper motion. Based on present day observations, the position of Aldebaran has shifted 7′ in the last 2000 years; roughly a quarter the diameter of the full Moon. Note that 5,000 years ago the vernal equinox was close to Aldebaran.\n\nEnglish astronomer William Herschel discovered a faint companion to Aldebaran in 1782; an 11th magnitude star at an angular separation of 117″. This star was shown to be itself a close double star by S. W. Burnham in 1888, and he discovered an additional 14th magnitude companion at an angular separation of 31″. Follow on measurements of proper motion showed that Herschel's companion was diverging from Aldebaran, and hence they were not physically connected. However, the companion discovered by Burnham had almost exactly the same proper motion as Aldebaran, suggesting that the two formed a wide binary star system.\n\nWorking at his private observatory in Tulse Hill, England, in 1864 William Huggins performed the first studies of the spectrum of Aldebaran, where he was able to identify the lines of nine elements, including iron, sodium, calcium, and magnesium. In 1886, Edward C. Pickering at the Harvard College Observatory used a photographic plate to capture fifty absorption lines in the spectrum of Aldebaran. This became part of the Draper Catalogue, published in 1890. By 1887, the photographic technique had improved to the point that it was possible to measure a star's radial velocity from the amount of Doppler shift in the spectrum. By this means, the recession velocity of Aldebaran was estimated as (48 km/s), using measurements performed at Potsdam Observatory by Hermann C. Vogel and his assistant Julius Scheiner.\n\nThe angular diameter of this star was measured for the first time in 1921 using an interferometer attached to the Hooker Telescope at the Mount Wilson Observatory. The result was 0.0237″, which was in close agreement with the estimated values of the time.\n\nAldebaran is classified as a type K5 III star, which indicates it is an orange-hued giant star that has evolved off the main sequence band of the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram after exhausting the hydrogen at its core. The collapse of the centre of the star into a degenerate helium core has ignited a shell of hydrogen outside the core and Aldebaran is now a red giant. This has caused it to expand to 44.2 times the diameter of the Sun, equivalent to approximately 61 million kilometres (see 10 gigametres for similar sizes).\n\nMeasurements by the Hipparcos satellite and other sources put Aldebaran around away. Stellar models predict it only has about 50% more mass than the Sun, yet it shines with 425 times the Sun's luminosity due to the expanded radius. Aldebaran is a slightly variable star, of the slow irregular variable type \"LB\". It varies by about 0.2 in apparent magnitude from 0.75 to 0.95. With a near-infrared J band magnitude of −2.1, only Betelgeuse (−2.9), R Doradus (−2.6), and Arcturus (−2.2) are brighter.\n\nThe photosphere shows abundances of carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen that suggest the giant has gone through its first dredge-up stage—a normal step in the evolution of a star into a red giant during which material from deep within the star is brought up to the surface by convection. With its slow rotation, Aldebaran lacks a dynamo needed to generate a corona and hence is not a source of hard X-ray emission. However, small scale magnetic fields may still be present in the lower atmosphere, resulting from convection turbulence near the surface. (The measured strength of the magnetic field on Aldebaran is 0.22 G.) Any resulting soft X-ray emissions from this region may be attenuated by the chromosphere, although ultraviolet emission has been detected in the spectrum. The star is currently losing mass at a rate of with a velocity of . This stellar wind may be generated by the weak magnetic fields in the lower atmosphere.\n\nBeyond the chromosphere of Aldebaran is an extended molecular outer atmosphere (MOLsphere) where the temperature is cool enough for molecules of gas to form. This region lies between 1.2 and 2.8 times the radius of the star, with temperatures of 1,000−2,000 K. The spectrum reveals lines of carbon monoxide, water, and titanium oxide. Past this radius, the modest outflow of the stellar wind itself declines in temperature to about 7,500 K at a distance of 1 Astronomical Unit (AU)−the distance of the Earth from the Sun. The wind continues to expand until it reaches the termination shock boundary with the hot, ionized interstellar medium that dominates the Local Bubble, forming a roughly spherical astrosphere with a radius of around 1,000 AU, centered on Aldebaran.\n\nAldebaran is one of the easiest stars to find in the night sky, partly due to its brightness and partly due to its spatial relation to one of the more noticeable asterisms in the sky. If one follows the three stars of Orion's belt from left to right (in the Northern Hemisphere) or right to left (in the Southern), the first bright star found by continuing that line is Aldebaran.\n\nSince the star is located (by chance) in the line of sight between the Earth and the Hyades, it has the appearance of being the brightest member of the more scattered Hyades open star cluster that makes up the bull's-head-shaped asterism; however, the star cluster is actually more than twice as far away, at about 150 light years.\n\nAldebaran is close enough to the ecliptic to be occulted by the Moon. Such occultations occur when the Moon's ascending node is near the autumnal equinox. A series of 49 occultations occur starting at 29 Jan 2015 and ending at 3 Sep 2018. Each event is visible from a different location on Earth, but always in the northern hemisphere or close to the equator. That means that people in e.g. Australia or South Africa can never observe an Aldebaran occultation. This is due to the fact that Aldebaran is slightly too far south of the ecliptic. A reasonably accurate estimate for the diameter of Aldebaran was obtained during the September 22, 1978 occultation. Aldebaran is in conjunction with the Sun around June 1 of each year.\n\nOccultations by planets are not possible at present, as each planet passes Aldebaran north. The closest conjunction of a planet with Aldebaran in the 21st century occurred on July 9, 2012, when Venus passed Aldebaran 56' northward. However, in the far future and far past occultations of Aldebaran by Mercury and Venus occurred as result of wandering nodes. The next occultation of Aldebaran by a planet, Venus, will occur on 5366 August 27.\n\nFive faint stars are positioned so that they appear close to Aldebaran. These double stars were given alphabetic secondary star designations more or less in the order of their discovery, with the letter A reserved for the primary star. Some of the characteristics of these components, including their position relative to Aldebaran, are listed in the table at right.\n\nSome surveys have indicated that Alpha Tauri B may have about the same proper motion and parallax as Aldebaran and thus may be a physical binary system. However these measurements are difficult to make because the dim B component appears so close to the bright primary star. The resulting margin of error is too large to positively establish (or exclude) a physical relationship between the two stars. So far neither the B component, nor anything else, has been unambiguously shown to be physically associated with Aldebaran.\n\nAlpha Tauri CD is a binary system with the C and D component stars gravitationally bound to and co-orbiting each other. These co-orbiting stars have been shown to be located far beyond Aldebaran and are members of the Hyades star cluster. As with the rest of the stars in the cluster they do not physically interact with Aldebaran in any way.\n\nIn 1993, radial velocity measurements of Aldebaran, Arcturus and Pollux showed that Aldebaran exhibited a long-period radial velocity oscillation, which could be interpreted as a \"substellar companion\". The measurements for Aldebaran implied a companion with a minimum mass 11.4 times that of Jupiter in a 643-day orbit at a separation of in a mildly eccentric orbit. However, all three stars surveyed showed similar oscillations yielding similar companion masses, and the authors concluded that the variation was likely to be intrinsic to the star rather than due to the gravitational effect of a companion. In 2015 a study showed stable longterm evidence for both a planetary companion and stellar activity.\nIf the sun were to be observed from this star, it would be a faint 6.4 magnitude star located between Ophiuchus and Scorpius on the diametrically opposite coordinates. This magnitude sits between Uranus's 5.95 and Pallas's 6.49.\n\nWhile some constellations made of bright, distant stars would be more or less similar the rest of the night sky would be unfamiliar to someone from Earth. To highlight differences, Orion would have its belt reduced to two stars due to Mintaka being on top of Alnilam. Furthermore, Bellatrix would be closer to the said belt, giving the constellation an overall ribbon-like shape. \n\nConversely, the Hyades and Pleiades would be in similar regions of the sky due to their enormous distance even from this star (they are located 153 ly and 444 ly, respectively).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3078", "title": "Altair", "text": "Altair\n\nAltair (), also designated Alpha Aquilae (α Aquilae, abbreviated Alpha Aql, α Aql), is the brightest star in the constellation of Aquila and the twelfth brightest star in the night sky. It is currently in the G-cloud—a nearby accumulation of gas and dust known as an interstellar cloud. Altair is an A-type main sequence star with an apparent visual magnitude of 0.77 and is one of the vertices of the asterism known as the Summer Triangle (the other two vertices are marked by Deneb and Vega). It is 16.7 light-years (5.13 parsecs) from the Sun and is one of the closest stars visible to the naked eye.\n\nAltair rotates rapidly, with a velocity at the equator of approximately 286 km/s. This is a significant fraction of the star's estimated breakup speed of 400 km/s. A study with the Palomar Testbed Interferometer revealed that Altair is not spherical, but is flattened at the poles due to its high rate of rotation. Other interferometric studies with multiple telescopes, operating in the infrared, have imaged and confirmed this phenomenon.\n\n\"α Aquilae\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Aquilae\") is the star's Bayer designation. The traditional name \"Altair\" has been used since medieval times. It is an abbreviation of the Arabic phrase , \"al-nesr al-ṭā’ir\" (\"\"). In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN, which included \"Altair\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\n\nAlong with Beta Aquilae and Gamma Aquilae, Altair forms the well-known line of stars sometimes referred to as the \"Family of Aquila\" or \"Shaft of Aquila\".\n\nAltair is a type-A main sequence star with approximately 1.8 times the mass of the Sun and 11 times its luminosity. Altair possesses an extremely rapid rate of rotation; it has a rotational period of approximately 9 hours. For comparison, the equator of the Sun requires a little more than 25 days for a complete rotation. This rapid rotation forces Altair to be oblate; its equatorial diameter is over 20 percent greater than its polar diameter.\n\nSatellite measurements made in 1999 with the Wide Field Infrared Explorer showed that the brightness of Altair fluctuates slightly, varying by just a few thousandths of a magnitude with several different periods less than 2 hours. As a result, it was identified in 2005 as a Delta Scuti variable star. Its light curve can be approximated by adding together a number of sine waves, with periods that range between 0.8 and 1.5 hours. It is a weak source of coronal X-ray emission, with the most active sources of emission being located near the star's equator. This activity may be due to convection cells forming at the cooler equator.\n\nThe angular diameter of Altair was measured interferometrically by R. Hanbury Brown and his co-workers at Narrabri Observatory in the 1960s. They found a diameter of 3milliarcseconds. Although Hanbury Brown et al. realized that Altair would be rotationally flattened, they had insufficient data to experimentally observe its oblateness. Altair was later observed to be flattened by infrared interferometric measurements made by the Palomar Testbed Interferometer in 1999 and 2000. This work was published by G. T. van Belle, David R. Ciardi and their co-authors in 2001.\n\nTheory predicts that, owing to Altair's rapid rotation, its surface gravity and effective temperature should be lower at the equator, making the equator less luminous than the poles. This phenomenon, known as gravity darkening or the von Zeipel effect, was confirmed for Altair by measurements made by the Navy Prototype Optical Interferometer in 2001, and analyzed by Ohishi et al. (2004) and Peterson et al. (2006). Also, A. Domiciano de Souza et al. (2005) verified gravity darkening using the measurements made by the Palomar and Navy interferometers, together with new measurements made by the VINCI instrument at the VLTI.\n\nAltair is one of the few stars for which a direct image has been obtained. In 2006 and 2007, J. D. Monnier and his coworkers produced an image of Altair's surface from 2006 infrared observations made with the MIRC instrument on the CHARA array interferometer; this was the first time the surface of any main-sequence star, apart from the Sun, had been imaged. The false-color image was published in 2007. The equatorial radius of the star was estimated to be 2.03 solar radii, and the polar radius 1.63 solar radii—a 25% increase of the stellar radius from pole to equator. The polar axis is inclined by about 60° to the line of sight from the Earth.\n\nThe term \"Al Nesr Al Tair\" appeared in Al Achsasi al Mouakket's catalogue, which was translated into Latin as \"Vultur Volans\". This name was applied by the Arabs to the asterism of α, β, and γ Aquilae and probably goes back to the ancient Babylonians and Sumerians, who called α Aquilae the eagle star. The spelling \"Atair\" has also been used. Medieval astrolabes of England and Western Europe depicted Altair and Vega as birds.\n\nThe Koori people of Victoria also knew Altair as \"Bunjil\", the wedge-tailed eagle, and β and γ Aquilae are his two wives the black swans. The people of the Murray River knew the star as \"Totyerguil\". The Murray River was formed when \"Totyerguil\" the hunter speared \"Otjout\", a giant Murray cod, who, when wounded, churned a channel across southern Australia before entering the sky as the constellation Delphinus.\n\nIn Chinese, the asterism consisting of α, β, and γ Aquilae is known as \"Hé Gǔ\" (; lit. \"river drum\"). Altair is thus known as \"Hé Gǔ èr\" (; lit. \"river drum two\", meaning the \"second star of the drum at the river\"). However, Altair is better known by its other names: \"Qiān Niú Xīng\" () or \"Niú Láng Xīng\" (), translated as the \"cowherd star\". These names are an allusion to a love story, \"The Weaver Girl and the Cowherd\", in which Niulang (represented by Altair) and his two children (represented by β and γ Aquilae) are separated from respectively their wife and mother Zhinu (represented by Vega) by the Milky Way. They are only permitted to meet once a year, when magpies form a bridge to allow them to cross the Milky Way.\n\nThe people of Micronesia called Altair \"Mai-lapa\", meaning \"big/old breadfruit\", while the Māori people called this star \"Poutu-te-rangi\", meaning \"pillar of heaven\".\n\nIn Western astrology, the star Altair was ill-omened, portending danger from reptiles.\n\nJapan Airlines's Starjet 777-200 JA8983 was named Altair.\n\nAltair Airlines was a regional airline that operated out of Philadelphia from 1966 to 1982.\n\nThe NASA Constellation Program announced \"Altair\" as the name of the Lunar Surface Access Module (LSAM) on December 13, 2007. The Russian-made Beriev Be-200 Altair seaplane is also named after the star.\n\nThe Altair 8800 was one of the first microcomputers intended for home use.\n\nAltair is the name of three United States navy ships: , and USNS Altair (T-AKR-291).\n\n\"Altair\" is the name of a 1919 poem by Karle Wilson Baker. \nThe bright primary star has the multiple star designation WDS 19508+0852A and has three faint visual companion stars, WDS 19508+0852B, C, and D. Component B is not physically close to A but merely appears close to it in the sky.\n\n"}
{"id": "3079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3079", "title": "Australian Broadcasting Corporation", "text": "Australian Broadcasting Corporation\n\nThe Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) is Australia's national public broadcaster, owned and funded by the government. The ABC plays a leading role in the history of broadcasting in Australia. With a total annual budget of A$1.22 billion, the corporation provides television, radio, online and mobile services throughout metropolitan and regional Australia, as well as overseas through the Australia Network and Radio Australia.\n\nFounded in 1929 as the Australian Broadcasting Company, it was subsequently made a state-owned corporation on 1 July 1932 as the Australian Broadcasting Commission. The \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\" changed the name of the organisation to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, effective 1 July 1983. Although funded and owned by the government, the ABC remains editorially independent as ensured through the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\".\n\nThe ABC is sometimes informally referred to as \"Aunty\", originally in imitation of the British Broadcasting Corporation's nickname.\n\nThe first public radio station in Australia opened in Sydney on 23 November 1923 under the call sign 2SB with other stations in Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth and Hobart following. A licensing scheme, administered by the Postmaster-General's Department, was soon established allowing certain stations government funding, albeit with restrictions placed on their advertising content.\n\nFollowing a 1927 royal commission inquiry into radio licensing issues, the government established the National Broadcasting Service which subsequently took over a number of the larger funded stations. It also nationalised the Australian Broadcasting Company which had been created by entertainment interests to supply programs to various radio stations. On 1 July 1932, the Australian Broadcasting Commission was established, taking over the operations of the National Broadcasting Service and eventually establishing offices in each of Australia's capital cities.\nOver the next four years the stations were reformed into a cohesive broadcasting organisation through regular program relays, coordinated by a centralised bureaucracy. The Australian broadcast radio spectrum was constituted of the ABC and the commercial sector.\n\nNews broadcasts were initially restricted, due to pressure from Sir Keith Murdoch, who controlled many Australian newspapers. However, journalists such as Frank Dixon and John Hinde began to subvert the agreements in the late 1930s. in 1939, Warren Denning was appointed to Canberra as the first ABC political correspondent, after Murdoch had refused to allow his newspapers to cover a speech by Joseph Lyons.\n\nIn 1942 \"The Australian Broadcasting Act\" was passed, giving the ABC the power to decide when, and in what circumstances, political speeches should be broadcast. Directions from the Minister about whether or not to broadcast any matter now had to be made in writing, and any exercise of the power had to be mentioned in the Commission's Annual Report. It was used only once, in 1963. In the same year, \"Kindergarten of the Air\" began on ABC Radio in Perth, and was later broadcast nationally.\n\nCater argues that reform was urgently needed in 1945:\n\nThe ABC commenced television broadcasting in 1956, and followed the earlier radio practice of naming the station after the first letter of the base state. ABN-2 (New South Wales) Sydney was inaugurated by Prime Minister Robert Menzies on 5 November 1956, with the first broadcast presented by Michael Charlton, and James Dibble reading the first television news bulletin. ABV-2 (Melbourne, Victoria) followed two weeks later, on 18 November 1956. Stations in other capital cities followed: ABQ-2 (Brisbane, Queensland) (1959), ABS-2 (Adelaide, South Australia) (1960), ABW-2 (Perth, Western Australia) (1960), and ABT-2 (Hobart, Tasmania) (1960). ABC-3 Canberra opened in 1961, and ABD-6 (Darwin, Northern Territories) started broadcasting in 1971, both named after the base city.\n\nAlthough radio programs could be distributed nationally by landline, television relay facilities were not in place until the early 1960s. This meant that news bulletins had to be sent to each capital city by teleprinter, to be prepared and presented separately in each city, with filmed materials copied manually and sent to each state. Other television programs at the time included the popular \"Six O'Clock Rock\" hosted by Johnny O'Keefe, \"Mr. Squiggle\", as well as operas and plays.\n\nIn 1973 New South Wales Rugby League boss Kevin Humphreys negotiated rugby league's first television deal with the ABC.\nIn 1975, colour television was introduced into Australia, and within a decade the ABC had moved into satellite broadcasting, greatly enhancing its ability to distribute content nationally. In the same year, the ABC introduced a 24-hour-a-day AM rock station in Sydney, 2JJ (Double Jay), which was eventually expanded into the national Triple J FM network. A year later, a national classical music network was established on the FM band, broadcasting from Adelaide. It was initially known as ABC-FM (now called ABC Classic FM) – referring both to its 'fine music' programming and radio frequency.\n\nABC budget cuts began in 1976 and continued until 1985. In 1978 the ABC NSW Staff Association organised a strike against budget cuts and political interference. Sydney ABC was off air for four days. A packed free concert in support was held at the Regent Theatre and compered by Bob Hudson. It featured Fred Dagg and Robyn Archer. In 1991, Tom Molomby wrote:\n\nThe \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\" changed the name of the organisation from the \"Australian Broadcasting Commission\" to the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation\", effective 1 July 1983. At the same time, the newly formed Corporation underwent significant restructuring. The ABC was split into separate television and radio divisions, with an overhaul of management, finance, property and engineering. Geoffrey Whitehead was the initial managing director; however, following his resignation in 1986, David Hill (at the time chair of the ABC Board) took over his position.\n\nProgram production in indigenous affairs, comedy, social history and current affairs was significantly expanded, while the Corporation's output of drama was boosted. Local production trebled from 1986–91 with the assistance of co-production, co-financing, and pre-sales arrangements.\n\nA new Concert Music Department was formed in 1985 to co-ordinate the corporation's six symphony orchestras, which in turn received a greater level of autonomy to better respond to local needs. Open-air free concerts and tours, educational activities, and joint ventures with other music groups were undertaken at the time to expand the orchestras' audience reach.\n\nABC Radio was restructured significantly again in 1985 – Radio One became the Metropolitan network, while Radio 2 became known as Radio National (callsigns, however, were not standardised until 1990). New programs such as \"The World Today\", \"Australia All Over\", and \"The Coodabeen Champions\" were introduced, while ABC-FM established an Australian Music Unit in 1989. Radio Australia began to focus on the Asia-Pacific region, with coverage targeted at the south west and central Pacific, south-east Asia, and north Asia. Radio Australia also carried more news coverage, with special broadcasts during the 1987 Fijian coup, Tiananmen Square massacre, and the First Gulf War.\nIn 1991, the Corporation's Sydney radio and orchestral operations moved to a new building built by Leighton Holdings on a single site in the inner-city suburb of Ultimo. In Melbourne, the ABC Southbank Centre was completed in 1994, and now houses the radio division in Victoria as well as the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra.\n\nThe ABC Multimedia Unit was established in July 1995, to manage the new ABC website (launched in August). Funding was allocated later that year specifically for online content, as opposed to reliance on funding for television and radio content. The first online election coverage was put together in 1996, and included news, electorate maps, candidate information and live results.\n\nBy the early 1990s, all major ABC broadcasting outlets moved to 24-hour-a-day operation, while regional radio coverage in Australia was extended with 80 new transmitters. Live television broadcasts of selected parliamentary sessions started in 1990. ABC NewsRadio, a continuous news network broadcast on the Parliamentary and News Network when parliament is not sitting, was launched on 5 October 1994.\n\nInternational television service Australia Television International was established in 1993, while at the same time Radio Australia increased its international reach. Reduced funding in 1997 for Radio Australia resulted in staff and programming cuts.\n\n\"Australia Television\" was sold to the Seven Network in 1998, however the service continued to show ABC news and current affairs programming up until its closure in 2001. The ABC's television operation joined its radio and online divisions at the corporation's Ultimo headquarters in 2000.\n\nIn 2001, digital television commenced after four years of preparation. In readiness, the ABC had fully digitised its production, post-production and transmission facilities – heralded at the time as \"the greatest advance in television technology since the introduction of colour\". The first programmes to be produced in widescreen were drama series \"Something in the Air\", \"Grass Roots\" and \"In the Mind of the Architect\".\n\nAt the same time, the ABC's Multimedia division was renamed \"ABC New Media\", becoming an output division of the ABC alongside Television and Radio. Legislation allowed the ABC to provide 'multichannels' – additional, digital-only, television services managed by the New Media Division. Soon after the introduction of digital television in 2001, Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel launched, showing a mix of programming aimed at teenagers and children.\n\nIn 2002, the ABC launched ABC Asia Pacific – the replacement for the defunct Australia Television International operated previously by the Seven Network. Much like its predecessor, and companion radio network Radio Australia, the service provided a mix of programming targeted at audiences throughout the Asia-Pacific region. Funding cuts in 2003 led to the closure of Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel.\n\nThe ABC launched a digital radio service, ABC DiG, in November 2002, available though the internet and digital television, but not available through any other terrestrial broadcast until DAB+ became available in 2009.\nABC2, a second attempt at a digital-only television channel, launched on 7 March 2005. Unlike its predecessors the new service was not dependent on government funding, instead running on a budget of A$3 million per year. Minister for Communications Helen Coonan inaugurated the channel at Parliament House three days later. Genre restrictions limiting the types of programming the channel could carry were lifted in October 2006 – ABC2 was henceforth able to carry programming classified as comedy, drama, national news, sport and entertainment.\n\nA high incidence of breast cancer in female staff working at the ABC's offices in Brisbane led to the closure of the site, based in Toowong, on 21 December 2006. Sixteen women were diagnosed with the disease in a period spanning 1994 to 2007. A progress report released in March 2007 by an independent panel formed to investigate the occurrences found that the rate of occurrence for breast cancer rate at the offices was eleven times higher than elsewhere – after the closure of the site, the ABC's Brisbane-based television and radio operations were moved to alternate locations around the city, including Ten Brisbane's studios at Mt Coot-tha. The ABC's managing director, Mark Scott, announced in August 2007 that new studios would be built on the site, following the final release of the Review and Scientific Investigation Panel's report. In January 2012 the ABC in Brisbane moved into purpose-built accommodation in South Bank.\n\nOn 8 February 2008, ABC TV was rebranded as ABC1, complementing the existing ABC2 digital-only channel which was launched on 7 March 2005. Branding was also added for a new kids' channel that had been announced throughout the Howard Government based on their winning the 2007 election but left to the 2009 Rudd Government Budget where ABC3 was funded and announced in June. A new online video-on-demand service launched in July of the same year, titled ABC iview, and the ABC launched digital radio broadcasts in the same month.\n\nABC News 24 launched on 22 July 2010, and brought with it both new programming content as well as a collaboration of existing news and current affair productions and resources. The ABC launched the 24-hour news channel to both complement its existing 24-hour ABC News Radio service and compete with commercial offerings on cable TV. It became the ABC's fifth domestic TV channel and the fourth launched within the past 10 years.\n\nOn 20 July 2014, ABC1 was renamed back to its original name of ABC.\n\nIn 2014 the ABC ran its first \"Mental As\" week focusing on improving awareness of mental health issues, as part of Mental Health Week.\n\nIn December 2015 it was announced that former Google executive Michelle Guthrie would take over from managing director Mark Scott, who was to retire in April 2016.\n\nBelow is a diagram of the ABC's divisional structure.\n\nThe operations of the ABC are governed by a board of directors, consisting of a managing director, five to seven directors, and until 2006, a staff-elected director. The managing director is appointed by the board for a period of up to five years, but is eligible for renewal. The authority and guidelines for the appointment of directors is provided for in the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\".\n\nAppointments to the ABC Board made by successive governments have often resulted in criticism of the appointees' political affiliation, background, and relative merit. Past appointments have associated directly with political parties – five of fourteen appointed chairmen have been accused of political affiliation or friendship, include Richard Downing and Ken Myer (both of whom publicly endorsed the Australian Labor Party at the 1972 election), as well as Sir Henry Bland. David Hill was close to Neville Wran, while Donald McDonald was considered to be a close friend of John Howard.\n\nFrom 2003 the Howard Government made several controversial appointments to the ABC Board, including prominent ABC critic Janet Albrechtsen, Ron Brunton, and Keith Windschuttle.\n\nDuring their 2007 federal election campaign, Labor announced plans to introduce a new system, similar to that of the BBC, for appointing members to the board. Under the new system, candidates for the ABC Board would be considered by an independent panel established \"at arm's length\" from the Communications Minister. If the Minister chose someone not on the panel's shortlist, they would be required to justify this to parliament. The ABC chairman would be nominated by the Prime Minister and endorsed by the Leader of the Opposition.\n\nThe new merit-based appointment system was announced on 16 October, in advance of the new triennial funding period starting in 2009.\n\nCurrent Board members are:\nThe ABC is funded mainly by the Australian government, in addition to some revenue received from its retail outlets. In the 2006–07 federal budget, the ABC received A$823 million of government funding, increased to $840 million in 2008–09. In the 2009–10 federal budget, the ABC received funding of $929.9 million.\n\nUntil 1948, the ABC was funded directly by radio licence fees; amendments were also made to the \"Australian Broadcasting Act\" that meant the ABC would receive its funding directly from the federal government. Licence fees remained until 1973 when they were abolished by the Whitlam Labor government, on the basis that the near-universality of television and radio services meant that public funding was a fairer method of providing revenue for government-owned radio and television broadcasters.\n\nThe term \"where your 8 cents a day goes\", coined in the late 1980s during funding negotiations, is often used in reference to the services provided by the ABC. It is estimated that the cost of the ABC per head of population per day was 7.1 cents a day, based on the Corporation's 2007–08 'base funding' of $543 million. Budget figures above show the ABC costs over 14 cents per day today.\n\nThe Australian Communications Minister, Senator Stephen Conroy indicated strong support from the Government for the ABC's funding submission for the 2009/10 budget, saying the organisation had been underfunded for many years.\n\nUnder the \"Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983\", the ABC Board is bound to \"maintain the independence and integrity of the Corporation\" and to ensure that \"the gathering and presentation by the Corporation of news and information is accurate and impartial according to the recognized standards of objective journalism.\"\n\nIn relation to impartiality and diversity of perspectives, the current ABC editorial policy requires of the broadcaster that:\n\nAs a publicly funded broadcaster, the ABC is expected not to take editorial stances on political issues, and is required to present a range of views with impartiality. Over the decades, accusations of \"bias\" at the ABC have arisen at different times, and various inquiries undertaken. \n\nReviews of the ABC are regularly commissioned and sometimes not released. A 2004 Roy Morgan media credibility survey found that media professionals regarded ABC Radio as the most accurate news source in the country. In mid 2013 the University of the Sunshine Coast released a study of the professional views of journalists. Slightly over half of respondents expected to vote for either Labor or The Greens whereas just under a third planned to vote Coalition. In contrast over 40% of ABC journalists would vote for The Greens and almost a third Labor. \nDr Rhonda Jolly's 2014 ABC Overview noted that \"many commentators have argued consistently that there is a left wing bias which dominates ABC news and programming\" and cited a 2005 piece by Paul Gray that the broadcaster was overly influenced by the \"narrow middle-class values of the Australian secular Left\" and said that \"while the national broadcaster had at times offended governments of all persuasions, it had always adopted a 'from the Left' perspective.\" Jolly also noted however that supporters of the ABC \"deny claims that the broadcaster is either intentionally or inadvertently biased\" and that \"Speaking from opposition, politicians have praised the ABC for its scrutiny of government.\" The paper noted that, in December 2013, ABC chairman James Spigelman called four independent audits a year in response to the frequent allegations of lack of impartiality in news and current affairs.\n\nThe conservative Liberal Party governments in the 1960s and 1970s attempted to influence the ABC's political coverage by threatening to reduce funding for its news and current affairs division.\n\nBob Hawke criticised some of the 7.30 Report's coverage of the 1991 Gulf War to which he committed naval forces as being \"loaded\", \"biased\" and \"disgraceful\".\n\nFor much of the Howard Government years, ABC TV's masthead political programs were anchored by Labor affiliated journalists Kerry O'Brien, Barrie Cassidy and Maxine McKew. \"7.30 Report\" and \"Insiders\" were hosted by former Labor staffers Kerry O'Brien and Barrie Cassidy respectively, while the 2007 election saw \"Lateline\" host McKew defeat Liberal Prime Minister John Howard as the Labor candidate for the seat of Bennelong. At that same election, Liberal front bencher Joe Hockey was challenged unsuccessfully by ABC Sydney News weatherman turned Labor candidate Mike Bailey in the Seat of North Sydney.\n\nOf the 1996 prime ministerial Election debates between Opposition Leader John Howard and Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating, Howard later wrote: \"I flatly refused to have Kerry O'Brien of the ABC [moderate the debates] because of the way he had handled the second Keating-Hewson debate in 1993\" in which O'Brien \"went in to bat\" for Keating. Howard went on to win that election. A decade later, the ABC Media Watch program reported that NSW Liberal Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells had written to her constituents to say that the ABC had \"a collective loathing\" of John Howard. At the end of the Howard Government's term in 2007, left-wing political commentator Robert Manne wrote in \"The Monthly\" that the Howard Government had viewed the broadcaster as being run by \"left-wing ideologues\" who had \"supposedly pushed the agenda of the Left on issues like refugees, the republic, multiculturalism, reconciliation, radical feminism, extreme environmentalism, anti-Americanism, gay rights and so on.\"\n\nSoon after coming to office in 1996, the Howard Government reduced the ABC's operating grants by 10%. Its appointment of Jonathan Shier to the position of managing director was controversial, for his program of budget cuts, restructuring and the loss of several high-profile personalities and shows. Shier left the position early, on 31 October 2001. \"7.30 Report\" anchor Kerry O'Brien opposed Howard's budget cuts to the ABC, and describes the appointment of Shier as its Managing Director as a manifestation of the \"conservative obsession with the ABC as a kind of biased, left-wing culture\".\n\nIn Howard's last election, he was defeated in the Seat of Bennelong by Labor candidate Maxine McKew, who had hosted \"Lateline\" during the Howard era. Peter Mares reported for Radio National that \"some wags described it as an 'internal promotion', while others said she'd simply moved from the 'media wing' to the 'political wing' of the ALP\". Mares consulted ABC journalist turned NSW Liberal MLA Pru Goward who said: \" I have no doubt there was left-wing bias, I certainly thought it when I was there\", while McKew said there was no left wing bias, though \"what I detected years ago in the ABC, much more of a collectivist philosophy\".\n\nABC TV's masthead political programs continued to have strong Labor Party connections through the period. In October 2010, the ABC announced that former Labor staffer Kerry O'Brien would host \"Four Corners\", beginning in 2011. Former Labor staffer Barrie Cassidy continued to host the \"Insiders\" program. In December 2010, Chris Uhlmann, husband of Labor MP Gai Brodtmann, was appointed as co-host of the \"7.30\" current affairs program. In 2012, Sydney ABC News anchor Juanita Phillips began a relationship with Labor's Minister for Climate Change, Greg Combet. \n\nConservative commentators such as Andrew Bolt, Tim Blair and Gerard Henderson accused the ABC of a left-wing bias.\n\nLiberal Prime Minister Tony Abbott perceived the ABC to be left wing and hostile to his government, while his successor Malcolm Turnbull enjoyed better relations with the National Broadcaster. When the ABC co-operated with \"The Guardian\" to publish stolen documents purporting to reveal monitoring of Indonesian officials by Australian spy agencies under the Rudd Government, Abbott told 2GB radio: \"A lot of people feel at the moment that the ABC instinctively takes everyone's side but Australia's\". Abbott reportedly called the \"Q&A\" program a \"Lefty Lynch Mob\". When it invited a man convicted of threatening Commonwealth officials to participate in questioning one of his ministers amid a heightened terrorism alert in June 2015, Abbott asked the makers of the program: \"whose side are you on?\". The ABC found that there had been an \"error of judgement', but repeated the program later in the week, prompting Abbott to say that \"heads should roll\" over the affair. Abbott initiated a brief ministerial boycott of the \"Q&A\" program following the affair. \n\nThe broadcaster was critical of Abbott when he broke an election-eve promise not to make cuts to the ABC, and required 4.6% cuts over five years as part of his \"Budget repair\" program. In early 2015, an internal ABC review of its coverage of Joe Hockey's first Budget criticised the post-budget interviews by \"7:30\" and \"Lateline\", finding that the interviewers had given the impression of bias. \n\nWhen Abbott lost the leadership to Turnbull in the September 2015 Liberal leadership spill, the hosts of the ABC's political programs spoke in favour of Abbott's demise. Kerry O'Brien and Barrie Cassidy, hosts respectively of the ABC's flagship weekly current affairs programs \"Four Corners\" and \"Insiders\", welcomed the replacement of Abbott by Turnbull, as did ABC radio commentators Fran Kelly Paul Bongiorno and Amanda Vanstone. Fairfax and News Limited reported that Leigh Sales, the host of \"7.30\" gave Turnbull an unusually warm first interview following his toppling of Abbott.\n\nIn a March 2016 interview with ABC Managing Director Mark Scott, \"Media Watch\" host Paul Barry examined the question of perceptions of left wing bias at the ABC. Scott noted that while perhaps the ABC was more concerned about gay marriage than about electricity prices, he did not accept the criticism of bias because \"a lot of that criticism comes from right wing commentators and they wonder where are the strong right wing commentators on the ABC. We don’t do that kind of journalism. We don’t ask questions about our journalists’ voting pattern and where their ideology are. We look at the journalism that they put to air and we have strong editorial standards...\" Following the interview, conservative ABC critic Andrew Bolt wrote \"How can the man heading our biggest media organisation be so blind to the ABC's unlawful and dangerous Leftist bias?\" while former \"Media Watch\" host Jonathan Holmes wrote for \"The Age\" that this interview indicated that ABC management had failed to recognise a clear problem of left wing bias among some capital city radio presenters.\n\nOver the period, ABC TV and radio hosts advocated strongly in support of same-sex marriage, upon which the wider Australian community and political parties were divided. When the Turnbull Government announced plans for a postal plebiscite on the issue, advocacy for change continued, prompting a call for restraint from the ABC's editorial policy manager Mark Maley.\n\nA number of former journalists and presenters have moved from positions at the ABC to politics.\n\nState Labor premiers and chief ministers Bob Carr,\nAlan Carpenter,\nand Clare Martin are all former ABC journalists. Other ABC Labor politicians include Mary Delahunty, Maxine McKew, Mike Bailey, Ian Baker, Leon Bignell, John Bowler, Bob Debus, Malarndirri McCarthy, Frank McGuire, Neville Oliver and Diana Warnock. Senior ABC political reporter Kerry O'Brien was press secretary to Labor prime minister Gough Whitlam and Labor deputy leader Lionel Bowen and Barrie Cassidy was press secretary to Labor prime minister Bob Hawke. Radio National's Phillip Adams is a former member of the Communist Party of Australia and the Labor Party, and Melbourne ABC radio's Jon Faine is a former member of the Labor Party.\n\nOn the Coalition side of politics, Pru Goward has served as a Minister in the NSW state Liberal Government, Rob Messenger, Peter Collins, Eoin Cameron, Scott Emerson and Sarah Henderson all held, or hold, positions at the ABC. Radio National's \"Counterpoint\" program is hosted by former Liberal minister Amanda Vanstone, who describes herself as \"liberal\" rather than \"conservative\".\n\nResearch undertaken by the broadcaster in 2007 indicated that out of a total of 19 former employees moving into party political positions, 10 have joined the Labor Party and nine the Liberal Party.\n\nThe ABC operates 54 local radio stations, in addition to four national networks and international service Radio Australia. In addition, DiG Radio launched on digital platforms in 2002, currently offering three separate stations.\n\nABC Local Radio is the Corporation's flagship radio station in each broadcast area. There are 54 individual stations, each with a similar format consisting of locally presented light entertainment, news, talk back, music, sport and interviews, in addition to some national programming such as \"AM\", \"PM\", \"The World Today\", sporting events and \"Nightlife\".\n\nABC Grandstand is a live radio sports focused commentary and talk-back program which runs on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation local radio network across Australia and on one digital-only station. The program runs on Saturdays and Sundays, typically from noon or an hour before, until 6 pm.\n\nDouble J is aimed at over-30s alternative music listeners. It is owned and operated by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.\n\nABC Jazz was launched as a digital only station designed to broadcast a variety of different jazz styles including bebop, acid jazz, cool jazz and contemporary styles of Jazz.\n\nTriple J Unearthed is where artists upload their music and they play and judge it on the channel.\n\nABC Extra is for special events national Digital Radio channel brings you extra coverage of events and ideas that matter.\n\nABC Radio Australia is the international radio station.\n\nABC Country features country style music.\n\nABC Radio National broadcasts more than 60 special interest programmes per week covering a range of topics including music, comedy, book readings, radio dramas, poetry, science, health, the arts, religion, social history and current affairs.\n\nABC NewsRadio is a rolling news service, previously known as the Parliamentary and News Network. The service was established to broadcast federal parliamentary sittings, to relieve the local ABC radio network from this intermittent task, and to provide a news service at other times. The network broadcasts news on a 24/7 format with updates on the quarter-hour. Much of its news content is produced by the ABC itself, however many programmes are relayed from the BBC World Service, NPR, Deutsche Welle, Radio Netherlands and CNN Radio.\n\nABC Classic FM was the ABC's first FM radio service. It was originally known simply as \"ABC FM\", and for a short time \"ABC Fine Music\". Its format borrowed heavily from community stations that eventually founded the Fine Music Network, as well as BBC Radio 3.\n\nTriple J is the national youth radio network, and broadcasts contemporary alternative and independent music; it is targeted at people aged 18–35. While the network plays music from around the world, it has a strong focus on local artists. Triple J was formerly known as \"Double Jay\" when it launched in Sydney on 19 January 1975.\n\nABC Radio broadcasts regular news bulletins across most of its radio stations. Many of these bulletins are heralded by the \"Majestic Fanfare\", written by British composer Charles Williams in 1935.\n\nThe ABC operates 6 national television channels.\n\nABC is a TV channel that consists of programs of:\n\nABC HD has the same programs as ABC but is in high definition.\n\nABC2 has comedy, drama, documentaries and repeats from ABC.\n\nABC Me is another TV channel, but with a focus for primary school children, 6-15 years old. It broadcasts a range of genres, including comedy, drama, music, animation, extreme sports, wildlife and news-based programmes.\n\nABC Kids is a TV channel for children under 6, with educational programs.\n\nABC NEWS is a 24 hour news channel with news related programs, such as \"News Breakfast, Weekend Breakfast, ABC News Mornings, ABC News at Noon, ABC News Afternoons, ABC News — Early Edition, 7.30, Lateline, Insiders, Four Corners, Behind the News, Q&A, Catalyst, Landline, Offsiders, One Plus One, The Business, The Drum, The Quarters, The World, State to State, Capital Hill\"\n\nThe ABC operates ABC Studios. ABC, the Corporation's original television service, receives the bulk of funding for television and shows first-run news, and ABC Kids.\n\nAn experimental Multimedia Unit was established in 1995, charged with developing policy for the ABC's work in web publishing. This unit continued until 2000, when the New Media division was formed, bringing together the ABC's online output as a division similar to Television or Radio. The division had over a million pages of material published by late 2003.\n\nIn 2001 the New Media division became New Media and Digital Services, reflecting the broader remit to develop content for digital platforms such as digital television. In addition to ABC Online, the division also had responsibility over the ABC's two digital television services, Fly TV and the ABC Kids channel, until their closure in 2003. In March 2005 the division oversaw the launch of ABC2, a free-to-air digital television channel, in effect a replacement for ABC Kids and Fly.\n\nIn conjunction with the ABC's radio division, New Media and Digital Services implemented the ABC's first podcasts in December 2004. By mid-2006 the ABC had become an international leader in podcasting with over fifty podcast programmes delivering hundreds of thousands of downloads per week, including trial video podcasts of The Chaser's War on Everything and jtv.\n\nIn February 2007, the New Media & Digital Services division was dissolved and divided up amongst other areas of the ABC. It was replaced by a new Innovation division, to manage ABC Online and investigate new technologies for the ABC.\nIn 2015 the Innovation division was replaced with the Digital Network division.\n\nAustralia Network, formerly ABC Asia Pacific, is an international satellite television service operated by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, funded by advertising and grants from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Aimed at the Asia-Pacific region, the service broadcasts a mixture of English language programming, including general entertainment, sport, and current affairs.\n\nABC Radio Australia is an international shortwave, satellite and internet radio service with transmissions aimed at East Asia and the Pacific Islands, although its signals are also audible in many other parts of the world. It features programmes in various languages spoken in these regions, including Mandarin, Indonesian, Vietnamese, Khmer and Tok Pisin.\n\nRadio Australia bulletins are also carried on WRN Broadcast, available via satellite in Europe and North America.\n\nABC Commercial is the division of the ABC responsible for pursuing new sources of revenue for the Corporation. It is composed of ABC Retail, ABC Consumer Publishing and Content Sales, as well as ABC Resource Hire. ABC retail outlets were established in 1974. All profits from the sale of consumer product and production services return to the Corporation to reinvest in programme-making.\n\nUp until the installation of disc recording equipment in 1935, all content broadcast on the ABC was produced live, including music. For this purpose, the ABC established broadcasting orchestras in each state, and in some centres also employed choruses and dance bands. This became known as the ABC Concert Music Division, which was controlled by the Federal Director of Music – the first of whom was W. G. James.\n\nThere are currently six state symphony orchestras:\n\nThe orchestras were corporatised in the 1990s, and were divested into independent companies on 1 January 2007.\n\nThe ABC logo is one of the most recognisable logos in Australia. In the early years of television, the ABC had been using Lissajous curves as fillers between programmes. In July 1963, the ABC conducted a staff competition to create a new logo for use on television, stationery, publications, microphone badges and ABC vehicles. In 1965, ABC graphics designer Bill Kennard, who had been experimenting with telerecording of the cathode ray oscilloscope displays, submitted a design which was part of the waveform from an oscilloscope. The letters \"ABC\" were added to the design and it was adopted as the ABC's official logo. Kennard was presented with £25 for his design.\n\nSince its original introduction in 1965, it has been updated several times, including with the introduction of colour television in 1975. The line was thickened to feature colour in the logo. The 1975 logo is the longest-running logo, with a lifespan of 27 years. In 2001, with the introduction of digital television in Australia, ABC Television adopted a modified version of the logo, featuring a silver 3D look and losing the \"over and under\" design. However, despite the launch of this logo, the 1975 logo is still used by the corporation. In July 2002, to celebrate the ABC's 70th anniversary, the corporation adopted a new logo across all media. This new logo still used the silver 3D colour but reverted to its \"over and under\" design. In 2014, as part of ABC1's renaming back into \"ABC TV\", the 1975 logo was brought back to on-air presentation. Despite this, the 2002 silver logo remains in usage by the corporation.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3080", "title": "Alexandria", "text": "Alexandria\n\nAlexandria ( or ; Arabic: '; '; \"\") is the second largest city and a major economic centre in Egypt, extending about along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in the north central part of the country. Its low elevation on the Nile delta makes it highly vulnerable to rising sea levels. Alexandria is an important industrial center because of its natural gas and oil pipelines from Suez. Alexandria is also an important tourist destination.\n\nAlexandria was founded around a small, ancient Egyptian town \"c.\" 331 BC by Alexander the Great. It became an important center of the Hellenistic civilization and remained the capital of Hellenistic and Roman and Byzantine Egypt for almost 1000 years until the Muslim conquest of Egypt in AD 641, when a new capital was founded at Fustat (later absorbed into Cairo). Hellenistic Alexandria was best known for the Lighthouse of Alexandria (\"Pharos\"), one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World; its Great Library (the largest in the ancient world; now replaced by a modern one); and the Necropolis, one of the Seven Wonders of the Middle Ages. Alexandria was the second most powerful city of the ancient world after Rome. Ongoing maritime archaeology in the harbor of Alexandria, which began in 1994, is revealing details of Alexandria both before the arrival of Alexander, when a city named Rhacotis existed there, and during the Ptolemaic dynasty.\n\nFrom the late 18th century, Alexandria became a major center of the international shipping industry and one of the most important trading centers in the world, both because it profited from the easy overland connection between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, and the lucrative trade in Egyptian cotton.\n\nAlexandria is believed to have been founded by Alexander the Great in April 331 BC as (\"Alexandria\"). Alexander's chief architect for the project was Dinocrates. Alexandria was intended to supersede Naucratis as a Hellenistic center in Egypt, and to be the link between Greece and the rich Nile valley. However, more recent radiocarbon dating of seashell fragments and lead contamination predate this claim by two millennia \n\nAlexandria was the intellectual and cultural center of the ancient world for some time. The city and its museum attracted many of the greatest scholars, including Greeks, Jews and Syrians. The city was later plundered and lost its significance.\n\nJust east of Alexandria (where Abu Qir Bay is now), there was in ancient times marshland and several islands. As early as the 7th century BC, there existed important port cities of Canopus and Heracleion. The latter was recently rediscovered under water.\n\nAn Egyptian city, Rhakotis, already existed on the shore also, and later gave its name to Alexandria in the Egyptian language (Egyptian *Raˁ-Ḳāṭit, written \"rˁ-ḳṭy.t\", 'That which is built up'). It continued to exist as the Egyptian quarter of the city. A few months after the foundation, Alexander left Egypt and never returned to his city. After Alexander's departure, his viceroy, Cleomenes, continued the expansion. Following a struggle with the other successors of Alexander, his general Ptolemy Lagides succeeded in bringing Alexander's body to Alexandria, though it was eventually lost after being separated from its burial site there.\n\nAlthough Cleomenes was mainly in charge of overseeing Alexandria's continuous development, the \"Heptastadion\" and the mainland quarters seem to have been primarily Ptolemaic work. Inheriting the trade of ruined Tyre and becoming the center of the new commerce between Europe and the Arabian and Indian East, the city grew in less than a generation to be larger than Carthage. In a century, Alexandria had become the largest city in the world and, for some centuries more, was second only to Rome. It became Egypt's main Greek city, with Greek people from diverse backgrounds.\n\nAlexandria was not only a center of Hellenism, but was also home to the largest urban Jewish community in the world. The Septuagint, a Greek version of the Tanakh, was produced there. The early Ptolemies kept it in order and fostered the development of its museum into the leading Hellenistic center of learning (Library of Alexandria), but were careful to maintain the distinction of its population's three largest ethnicities: Greek, Jewish, and Egyptian.\n\nIn AD 115, large parts of Alexandria were destroyed during the Kitos War, which gave Hadrian and his architect, Decriannus, an opportunity to rebuild it. In 215, the emperor Caracalla visited the city and, because of some insulting satires that the inhabitants had directed at him, abruptly commanded his troops to put to death all youths capable of bearing arms. On 21 July 365, Alexandria was devastated by a tsunami (365 Crete earthquake), an event annually commemorated years later as a \"day of horror.\"\n\nThe Islamic prophet, Muhammad's first interaction with the people of Egypt occurred in 628, during the Expedition of Zaid ibn Haritha (Hisma). He sent Hatib bin Abi Baltaeh with a letter to the king of Egypt (in reality Emperor Heraclius) and Alexandria called Muqawqis In the letter Muhammad said: \"I invite you to accept Islam, Allah the sublime, shall reward you doubly. But if you refuse to do so, you will bear the burden of the transgression of all the Copts\". During this expedition one of Muhammad's envoys Dihyah bin Khalifa Kalbi was attacked, Muhammad sent Zayd ibn Haritha to help him. Dihya approached the Banu Dubayb (a tribe which converted to Islam and had good relations with Muslims) for help. When the news reached Muhammad, he immediately dispatched Zayd ibn Haritha with 500 men to battle. The Muslim army fought with Banu Judham, killed several of them (inflicting heavy casualties), including their chief, Al-Hunayd ibn Arid and his son, and captured 1000 camels, 5000 of their cattle and 100 women and boys. The new chief of the Banu Judham who had embraced Islam appealed to Muhammad to release his fellow tribesmen, and Muhammad released them.\n\nIn 619, Alexandria fell to the Sassanid Persians. Although the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius recovered it in 629, in 641 the Arabs under the general 'Amr ibn al-'As captured it during the Muslim conquest of Egypt, after a siege that lasted 14 months.\n\nAfter the Battle of Ridaniya in 1517, the city was conquered by the Ottoman Turks and remained under Ottoman rule until 1798. Alexandria lost much of its former importance to the Egyptian port city of Rosetta during the 9th to 18th centuries, and only regained its former prominence with the construction of the Mahmoudiyah Canal in 1807.\n\nAlexandria figured prominently in the military operations of Napoleon's expedition to Egypt in 1798. French troops stormed the city on 2 July 1798, and it remained in their hands until the arrival of a British expedition in 1801. The British won a considerable victory over the French at the Battle of Alexandria on 21 March 1801, following which they besieged the city, which fell to them on 2 September 1801. Muhammad Ali, the Ottoman governor of Egypt, began rebuilding and redevelopment around 1810, and by 1850, Alexandria had returned to something akin to its former glory. Egypt turned to Europe in their effort to modernize the country. Greeks, followed by other Europeans and others, began moving to the city. In the early 20th century, the city became a home for novelists and poets.\n\nIn July 1882, the city came under bombardment from British naval forces and was occupied.\n\nIn July 1954, the city was a target of an Israeli bombing campaign that later became known as the Lavon Affair. On 26 October 1954, Alexandria's Mansheya Square was the site of a failed assassination attempt on Gamal Abdel Nasser.\n\nEuropeans began leaving Alexandria following the 1956 Suez Crisis that led to an outburst of Arab nationalism. The nationalization of property by Nasser, which reached its highest point in 1961, drove out nearly all the rest.\n\nThe most important battles and sieges of Alexandria include:\n\nGreek Alexandria was divided into three regions:\nTwo main streets, lined with colonnades and said to have been each about wide, intersected in the center of the city, close to the point where the Sema (or Soma) of Alexander (his Mausoleum) rose. This point is very near the present mosque of Nebi Daniel; and the line of the great East–West \"Canopic\" street, only slightly diverged from that of the modern Boulevard de Rosette (now Sharia Fouad). Traces of its pavement and canal have been found near the Rosetta Gate, but remnants of streets and canals were exposed in 1899 by German excavators outside the east fortifications, which lie well within the area of the ancient city.\n\nAlexandria consisted originally of little more than the island of Pharos, which was joined to the mainland by a mole and called the \"Heptastadion\" (\"seven stadia\"—a \"stadium\" was a Greek unit of length measuring approximately ). The end of this abutted on the land at the head of the present Grand Square, where the \"Moon Gate\" rose. All that now lies between that point and the modern \"Ras al-Tin\" quarter is built on the silt which gradually widened and obliterated this mole. The Ras al-Tin quarter represents all that is left of the island of Pharos, the site of the actual lighthouse having been weathered away by the sea. On the east of the mole was the Great Harbor, now an open bay; on the west lay the port of Eunostos, with its inner basin Kibotos, now vastly enlarged to form the modern harbor.\n\nIn Strabo's time, (latter half of the 1st century BC) the principal buildings were as follows, enumerated as they were to be seen from a ship entering the Great Harbor.\n\n\nThe names of a few other public buildings on the mainland are known, but there is little information as to their actual position. None, however, are as famous as the building that stood on the eastern point of Pharos island. There, The Great Lighthouse, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, reputed to be high, was situated. The first Ptolemy began the project, and the second Ptolemy (Ptolemy II Philadelphus) completed it, at a total cost of 800 talents. It took 12 years to complete and served as a prototype for all later lighthouses in the world. The light was produced by a furnace at the top and the tower was built mostly with solid blocks of limestone. The Pharos lighthouse was destroyed by an earthquake in the 14th century, making it the second longest surviving ancient wonder, after the Great Pyramid of Giza. A temple of Hephaestus also stood on Pharos at the head of the mole.\n\nIn the 1st century, the population of Alexandria contained over 180,000 adult male citizens, according to a census dated from 32 CE, in addition to a large number of freedmen, women, children and slaves. Estimates of the total population range from 216,000 to 500,000 making it one of the largest cities ever built before the Industrial Revolution and the largest pre-industrial city that was not an imperial capital.\n\nAlexandria is located in the country of Egypt, on the southern coast of the Mediterranean.\n\nAlexandria has a borderline hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification: BWh), approaching a hot semi-arid climate (BSh). As the rest of Egypt's northern coast, the prevailing north wind, blowing across the Mediterranean, gives the city a less severe climate from the desert hinterland. Rafah and Alexandria are the wettest places in Egypt, the other wettest places are Rosetta, Baltim, Kafr el-Dawwar and Mersa Matruh. The city's climate is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea, moderating its temperatures, causing variable rainy winters and moderately hot summers that, at times, can be very humid; January and February are the coolest months, with daily maximum temperatures typically ranging from and minimum temperatures that could reach . Alexandria experiences violent storms, rain and sometimes snow, sleet and hail during the cooler months; these events, combined with a poor drainage system, have been responsible for occasional flooding in the city. July and August are the hottest and driest months of the year, with an average daily maximum temperature of .\nThe average annual rainfall is around but has been as high as \n\nPort Said, Kosseir, Baltim, Damietta and Alexandria have the least temperature variation in Egypt.\n\nThe highest recorded temperature was on May 30, 1961 and the coldest recorded temperature was on January 31, 1994.\n\nDue to the constant presence of war in Alexandria in ancient times, very little of the ancient city has survived into the present day. Much of the royal and civic quarters sank beneath the harbour due to earthquake subsidence in AD 365, and the rest has been built over in modern times.\n\"Pompey's Pillar\", a Roman triumphal column, is one of the best-known ancient monuments still standing in Alexandria today. It is located on Alexandria's ancient acropolis—a modest hill located adjacent to the city's Arab cemetery—and was originally part of a temple colonnade. Including its pedestal, it is 30 m (99 ft) high; the shaft is of polished red granite, in diameter at the base, tapering to at the top. The shaft is high, and made out of a single piece of granite. Its volume is and weight approximately 396 tons. Pompey's Pillar may have been erected using the same methods that were used to erect the ancient obelisks. The Romans had cranes but they were not strong enough to lift something this heavy. Roger Hopkins and Mark Lehrner conducted several obelisk erecting experiments including a successful attempt to erect a 25-ton obelisk in 1999. This followed two experiments to erect smaller obelisks and two failed attempts to erect a 25-ton obelisk. The structure was plundered and demolished in the 4th century when a bishop decreed that Paganism must be eradicated. \"Pompey's Pillar\" is a misnomer, as it has nothing to do with Pompey, having been erected in 293 for Diocletian, possibly in memory of the rebellion of Domitius Domitianus. Beneath the acropolis itself are the subterranean remains of the Serapeum, where the mysteries of the god Serapis were enacted, and whose carved wall niches are believed to have provided overflow storage space for the ancient Library. In more recent years, many ancient artifacts have been discovered from the surrounding sea, mostly pieces of old pottery.\n\nAlexandria's catacombs, known as \"Kom El Shoqafa\", are a short distance southwest of the pillar, consist of a multi-level labyrinth, reached via a large spiral staircase, and featuring dozens of chambers adorned with sculpted pillars, statues, and other syncretic Romano-Egyptian religious symbols, burial niches, and sarcophagi, as well as a large Roman-style banquet room, where memorial meals were conducted by relatives of the deceased. The catacombs were long forgotten by the citizens until they were discovered by accident in 1900.\n\nThe most extensive ancient excavation currently being conducted in Alexandria is known as Kom El Deka. It has revealed the ancient city's well-preserved theater, and the remains of its Roman-era baths.\n\nPersistent efforts have been made to explore the antiquities of Alexandria. Encouragement and help have been given by the local Archaeological Society, and by many individuals, notably Greeks proud of a city which is one of the glories of their national history. Excavations were performed in the city by Greeks seeking the tomb of Alexander the Great without success.\nThe past and present directors of the museum have been enabled from time to time to carry out systematic excavations whenever opportunity is offered; D. G. Hogarth made tentative researches on behalf of the Egypt Exploration Fund and the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies in 1895; and a German expedition worked for two years (1898–1899). But two difficulties face the would-be excavator in Alexandria: lack of space for excavation and the underwater location of some areas of interest.\nSince the great and growing modern city stands immediately over the ancient one, it is almost impossible to find any considerable space in which to dig, except at enormous cost. Cleopatra VII's royal quarters were inundated by earthquakes and tsunami, leading to gradual subsidence in the 4th century AD. This underwater section, containing many of the most interesting sections of the Hellenistic city, including the palace quarter, was explored in 1992 and is still being extensively investigated by the French underwater archaeologist Franck Goddio and his team. It raised a noted head of Caesarion. These are being opened up to tourists, to some controversy. The spaces that are most open are the low grounds to northeast and southwest, where it is practically impossible to get below the Roman strata.\n\nThe most important results were those achieved by Dr. G. Botti, late director of the museum, in the neighborhood of “Pompey's Pillar”, where there is a good deal of open ground. Here, substructures of a large building or group of buildings have been exposed, which are perhaps part of the Serapeum. Nearby, immense catacombs and \"columbaria\" have been opened which may have been appendages of the temple. These contain one very remarkable vault with curious painted reliefs, now artificially lit and open to visitors.\n\nThe objects found in these researches are in the museum, the most notable being a great basalt bull, probably once an object of cult in the Serapeum. Other catacombs and tombs have been opened in Kom El Shoqafa (Roman) and Ras El Tin (painted).\n\nThe German excavation team found remains of a Ptolemaic colonnade and streets in the north-east of the city, but little else. Hogarth explored part of an immense brick structure under the mound of Kom El Deka, which may have been part of the Paneum, the Mausolea, or a Roman fortress.\n\nThe making of the new foreshore led to the dredging up of remains of the Patriarchal Church; and the foundations of modern buildings are seldom laid without some objects of antiquity being discovered. The wealth underground is doubtlessly immense; but despite all efforts, there is not much for antiquarians to see in Alexandria outside the museum and the neighborhood of “Pompey's Pillar”.\n\nThe temple was built in the Ptolemy era and dedicated to Osiris, which finished the construction of Alexandria. It is located in Abusir, the western suburb of Alexandria in Borg el Arab city. Only the outer wall and the pylons remain from the temple. There is evidence to prove that sacred animals were worshiped there. Archaeologists found an animal necropolis near the temple. Remains of a Christian church show that the temple was used as a church in later centuries. Also found in the same area are remains of public baths built by the emperor Justinian, a seawall, quays and a bridge. Near the beach side of the area, there are the remains of a tower built by Ptolemy II Philadelphus. The tower was an exact scale replica of the destroyed Alexandrine Pharos Lighthouse.\n\nThe most famous mosque in Alexandria is El-Mursi Abul Abbas Mosque in Bahary. Other notable mosques in the city include Ali ibn Abi Talib mosque in Somouha, Bilal mosque, al-Gamaa al-Bahari in Mandara, Hatem mosque in Somouha, Hoda el-Islam mosque in Sidi Bishr, al-Mowasah mosque in Hadara, Sharq al-Madina mosque in Miami, al-Shohadaa mosque in Mostafa Kamel, Al Qa'ed Ibrahim Mosque, Yehia mosque in Zizinia, Sidi Gaber mosque in Sidi Gaber, and Sultan mosque.\n\nAlexandria is the base of the Salafi movement's in Egypt. Al-Nour Party, which is based in the city and overwhelmingly won most of the Salafi votes in the 2011–12 parliamentary election, supports the president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.\n\nAfter Rome and Constantinople, Alexandria was considered the third-most important seat of Christianity in the world. The Pope of Alexandria was second only to the bishop of Rome, the capital of the Roman Empire until 430. The Church of Alexandria had jurisdiction over most of the continent of Africa. After the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, the Church of Alexandria was split between the Miaphysites and the Melkites. The Miaphysites went on to constitute what is known today as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. The Melkites went on to constitute what is known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria. In the 19th century, Catholic and Protestant missionaries converted some of the adherents of the Orthodox churches to their respective faiths.\n\nToday, the Patriarchal seat of the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church is Saint Mark Cathedral in Ramleh. The most important Coptic Orthodox churches in Alexandria include Pope Cyril I Church in Cleopatra, Saint Georges Church in Sporting, Saint Mark & Pope Peter I Church in Sidi Bishr, Saint Mary Church in Assafra, Saint Mary Church in Gianaclis, Saint Mina Church in Fleming, Saint Mina Church in Mandara and Saint Takla Haymanot's Church in Ibrahimeya.\n\nThe most important Eastern Orthodox churches in Alexandria are Agioi Anárgyroi Church, Church of the Annunciation, Saint Anthony Church, Archangels Gabriel & Michael Church, Taxiarchon Church, Saint Catherine Church, Cathedral of the Dormition in Mansheya, Church of the Dormition, Prophet Elijah Church, Saint George Church, Church of the Immaculate Conception in Ibrahemeya, Saint Joseph Church in Fleming, Saint Joseph of Arimathea Church, Saint Mark & Saint Nektarios Chapel in Ramleh, Saint Nicholas Church, Saint Paraskevi Church, Saint Sava Cathedral in Ramleh, Saint Theodore Chapel and the Russian church of Saint Alexander Nevsky in Alexandria, which serves the Russian speaking community in the city.\n\nThe Apostolic Vicariate of Alexandria in Egypt-Heliopolis-Port Said has jurisdiction over all Latin Church Catholics in Egypt. Member churches include Saint Catherine Church in Mansheya and Church of the Jesuits in Cleopatra. The city is also the nominal see of the Melkite Greek Catholic titular Patriarchate of Alexandria (generally vested in its leading Patriarch of Antioch) and the actual cathedral see of its Patriarchal territory of Egypt, Sudan and South Sudan, which uses the Byzantine Rite, and the nominal see of the Armenian Catholic diocese of Iskandkeriya (for all Egypt and Sudan, whose actual cathedral is in Cairo), a suffragan of the Armenian Catholic Patriarch of Cilicia, using the Armenian Rite.\n\nThe Saint Mark Church in Shatby, founded as part of Collège Saint Marc, is multi-denominational and holds liturgies according to Latin Catholic, Coptic Catholic and Coptic Orthodox rites.\n\nIn antiquity, Alexandria was a major center of the cosmopolitan religious movement called Gnosticism (today mainly remembered as a Christian heresy).\n\nAlexandria's once-flourishing Jewish community declined rapidly following the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, after which negative reactions towards Zionism among Egyptians led to Jewish residents in the city, and elsewhere in Egypt, being perceived as Zionist collaborators. Most Jewish residents of Egypt fled to the newly established Israel, France, Brazil and other countries in the 1950s and 1960s. The community once numbered 50,000 but is now estimated at below 50. The most important synagogue in Alexandria is the Eliyahu Hanavi Synagogue.\n\nAlexandria has a number of higher education institutions. Alexandria University is a public university that follows the Egyptian system of higher education. Many of its faculties are internationally renowned, most notably its Faculty of Medicine & Faculty of Engineering. In addition, Egypt-Japan University of Science and Technology in New Borg El Arab city, its is a research university set up in collaboration between the Japanese and Egyptian governments in 2010, the Arab Academy for Science, Technology & Maritime Transport is a semi-private educational institution that offers courses for high school, undergraduate level, and postgraduate students. It is considered the most reputable university in Egypt after the AUC American University in Cairo because of its worldwide recognition from board of engineers at UK & ABET in US. Université Senghor is a private French university that focuses on the teaching of humanities, politics and international relations, which mainly targets students from the African continent. Other institutions of higher education in Alexandria include Alexandria Institute of Technology (AIT) and Pharos University in Alexandria.\n\nAlexandria has a long history of foreign educational institutions. The first foreign schools date to the early 19th century, when French missionaries began establishing French charitable schools to educate the Egyptians. Today, the most important French schools in Alexandria run by Catholic missionaries include Collège de la Mère de Dieu, Collège Notre Dame de Sion, Collège Saint Marc, Ecoles des Soeurs Franciscaines (four different schools), École Girard, École Saint Gabriel, École Saint-Vincent de Paul, École Saint Joseph, École Sainte Catherine, and Institution Sainte Jeanne-Antide. As a reaction to the establishment of French religious institutions, a secular (laic) mission established Lycée el-Horreya, which initially followed a French system of education, but is currently a public school run by the Egyptian government. The only school in Alexandria that completely follows the French educational system is Lycée Français d'Alexandrie (École Champollion). It is usually frequented by the children of French expatriates and diplomats in Alexandria. The Italian school is the Istituto \"Don Bosco\".\n\nEnglish schools in Alexandria are becoming the most popular schools. English language schools in the city include: Riada Language School, Alexandria Language School, Future Language School, Future International Schools (Future IGCSE, Future American School and Future German school), Alexandria American School, British School of Alexandria, Egyptian American School, Pioneers Language School, Princesses Girls' School, Sidi Gaber Language School, Riada American School, Taymour English School, Sacred Heart Girls' School, Schutz American School, Victoria College, El Manar Language School for Girls (previously called Scottish School for Girls), Kawmeya Language School, El Nasr Boys' School (previously called British Boys' School), and El Nasr Girls' College. Most of these schools were nationalized during the rule of Gamal Abdel Nasser, and are currently Egyptian public schools run by the Egyptian Ministry of Education.\n\nThere are only two German schools in Alexandria which are Deutsche Schule der Borromärinnen (DSB of Saint Charles Borromé) and Future Deutsche Schule.\n\nThe Montessori educational system was first introduced in Alexandria in 2009 at Alexandria Montessori.\n\nThe most notable public schools in Alexandria include El Abbassia High School and Gamal Abdel Nasser High School.\n\nAlexandria is served by Alexandria International Airport and Borg El Arab Airport which is located about away from the city center.\n\nFrom late 2011, Alexandria International Airport was to be closed to commercial operations for two years as it underwent expansion, with all airlines operating out of Borg El Arab Airport from then onwards, where a brand new terminal was completed in February 2010.\nIn 2017 the government officially announced that Alexandria International Airport will shut down for good due to operational reasons, after having initially announced that it was to open during mid-2017.\n\n\nAlexandria's intracity commuter rail system extends from Misr Station (Alexandria's primary intercity railway station) to Abu Qir, parallel to the tram line. The commuter line's locomotives operate on diesel, as opposed to the overhead-electric tram.\n\nAlexandria plays host to two intercity railway stations: the aforementioned Misr Station (in the older Manshia district in the western part of the city) and Sidi Gaber railway station (in the district of Sidi Gaber in the center of the eastern expansion in which most Alexandrines reside), both of which also serve the commuter rail line. Intercity passenger service is operated by Egyptian National Railways.\n\nAn extensive tramway network was built in 1860 and is the oldest in Africa. The network begins at the El Raml district in the west and ends in the Victoria district in the east. Most of the vehicles are blue in color. Some smaller yellow-colored vehicles have further routes beyond the two main endpoints. The tram routes have one of four numbers: 1, 2, 5, and 6. All four start at El Raml, but only two (1 and 2) reach Victoria. There are two converging and diverging points. The first starts at Bolkly (Isis) and ends at San Stefano. The other begins at Sporting and ends at Mostafa Kamel. Route 5 starts at San Stefano and takes the inner route to Bolkly. Route 6 starts at Sidi Gaber El Sheikh in the outer route between Sporting and Mustafa Kamel. Route 1 takes the inner route between San Stefano and Bolkly and the outer route between Sporting and Mustafa Kamel. Route 2 takes the route opposite to Route 1 in both these areas. The tram fares are 25 piastres (0.25 pounds) during most of the day, and 50 piastres (0.50 pounds) after 9pm. Some trams (that date back the 30s) charge a pound. The tram is considered the cheapest method of public transport.\n\nTaxis in Alexandria sport a yellow-and-black livery and are widely available. While Egyptian law requires all cabs to carry meters, these generally do not work and fares must be negotiated with the driver on either departure or arrival.\n\nThe minibus share taxi system, or \"mashrū`\" operates along well-known traffic arteries. The routes can be identified by both their endpoints and the route between them:\n\nThe route is generally written in Arabic on the side of the vehicle, although some drivers change their route without changing the paint. Some drivers also drive only a segment of a route rather than the whole path; such drivers generally stop at a point known as a major hub of the transportation system (for example, Victoria) to allow riders to transfer to another car or to another mode of transport.\n\nFare is generally L.E. 2.00 to travel the whole route. Shorter trips may have a lower fare, depending on the driver and the length of the trip.\n\nAlexandria has four ports; namely the Western Port, which is the main port of the country that handles about 60% of the country’s exports and imports, Dekhela Port west of the Western Port, the Eastern Port which is a yachting harbor, and Abu Qir Port at the northern east of the governorate. It is commercial port for general cargo and phosphates.\n\nThe Royal Library of Alexandria, in Alexandria, Egypt, was once the largest library in the world. It is generally thought to have been founded at the beginning of the 3rd century BC, during the reign of Ptolemy II of Egypt. It was likely created after his father had built what would become the first part of the library complex, the temple of the Muses—the Museion, Greek \"Μουσείον\" (from which the Modern English word \"museum\" is derived).\n\nIt has been reasonably established that the library, or parts of the collection, were destroyed by fire on a number of occasions (library fires were common and replacement of handwritten manuscripts was very difficult, expensive, and time-consuming). To this day the details of the destruction (or destructions) remain a lively source of controversy.\n\nThe Bibliotheca Alexandrina was inaugurated in 2002, near the site of the old Library.\n\n\nThe main sport that interests Alexandrians is football, as is the case in the rest of Egypt and Africa. Alexandria Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Alexandria, Egypt. It is currently used mostly for football matches, and was used for the 2006 African Cup of Nations. The stadium is the oldest stadium in Egypt and Africa, being built in 1929. The stadium holds 20,000 people. Alexandria was one of three cities that participated in hosting the African Cup of Nations in January 2006, which Egypt won. Sea sports such as surfing, jet-skiing and water polo are practiced on a lower scale. The Skateboarding culture in Egypt started in this city. The city is also home to the Alexandria Sporting Club, which is especially known for its basketball team, which traditionally provides the country's national team with key players. The city hosted the AfroBasket, the continent's most prestigious basketball tournament, on four occasions (1970, 1975, 1983, 2003).\n\nAlexandria has four stadiums:\n\nOther less popular sports like tennis and squash are usually played in private social and sports clubs, like:\n\n\nAlexandria is a main summer resort and tourist attraction, due to its public and private beaches and ancient history and Museums, especially the Bibliotheca Alexandrina, based on reviving the ancient Library of Alexandria.\n\nOne of the main tourism attractions that start every year from the city is Cross Egypt Challenge. Started in 2011, Cross Egypt Challenge is an international cross-country motorcycle and scooter rally conducted throughout the most difficult tracks and roads of Egypt. Alexandria is known as the yearly starting point of Cross Egypt Challenge and a huge celebration is conducted the night before the rally starts after all the international participants arrive to the city.\n\nAlexandria is twinned with:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3082", "title": "Alexandria, Indiana", "text": "Alexandria, Indiana\n\nAlexandria is a city in Monroe Township, Madison County, Indiana, United States. It is about northeast of Indianapolis. According to the 2010 census, its population was 5,145, a decrease of 17.8% from 6,260 in 2000.\n\nAlexandria was platted in 1836 when it was certain that the Indiana Central Canal would be extended to that point. It was incorporated as a town in 1898.\n\nAlexandria is located at . According to the 2010 census, Alexandria has a total area of , all land.\n\nAlexandria is part of the Anderson, Indiana Metropolitan Statistical Area. \n\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 5,145 people, 2,113 households, and 1,362 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,507 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 97.4% White, 0.3% African American, 0.1% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.8% from other races, and 1.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.7% of the population.\n\nThere were 2,113 households of which 33.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.2% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 35.5% were non-families. 30.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.95.\n\nThe median age in the city was 38.2 years. 25.6% of residents were under the age of 18; 8.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.8% were from 25 to 44; 25.1% were from 45 to 64; and 15.6% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.8% male and 52.2% female.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 6,260 people, 2,481 households, and 1,654 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,308.6 people per square mile (891.9/km²). There were 2,704 housing units at an average density of 997.2 per square mile (385.2/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 98.10% White, 0.46% Black or African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 0.80% from two or more races. 0.99% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n\nThere were 2,481 households out of which 33.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.0% were married couples living together, 12.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.3% were non-families. 28.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 3.04.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 27.8% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 19.5% from 45 to 64, and 15.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.4 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $35,359, and the median income for a family was $42,731. Males had a median income of $30,529 versus $23,384 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,578. About 4.2% of families and 7.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.1% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.\n\nThe city council consists of seven members. Five members are elected from individual districts and two are elected at-large. The city is governed by a \"strong\" mayor system who appoints two council members and/or city residents to serve at the mayor's pleasure on the board of public works and safety. The chief financial officer is the clerk-treasurer. The clerk-treasure and mayor are full-time elected officials. The Alexandria City Court has a part-time locally elected judge.\n\nAlexandria Airport is a public use airport located southeast of the central business district of Alexandria.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3083", "title": "Alexandria, Louisiana", "text": "Alexandria, Louisiana\n\nAlexandria is the ninth-largest city in the state of Louisiana and is the parish seat of Rapides Parish, Louisiana, United States. It lies on the south bank of the Red River in almost the exact geographic center of the state. It is the principal city of the Alexandria metropolitan area (population 153,922) which encompasses all of Rapides and Grant parishes. Its neighboring city is Pineville. In 2010, the population was 47,723, an increase of 3 percent from the 2000 census.\n\nLocated along the Red River, the city of Alexandria was originally home to a community which supported activities of the adjacent outpost of \"Post du Rapides\". The area developed as an assemblage of traders and merchants in the agricultural lands bordering the mostly unsettled areas to the north and providing a link from the south to the El Camino Real and then larger settlement of Natchitoches, the oldest permanent settlement in the Louisiana Purchase.\n\nAlexander Fulton, a businessman from Washington County, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, received a land grant from Spain in 1785, and the first organized settlement was made at some point in the 1790s. In 1805, Fulton and business partner Thomas Harris Maddox laid out the town plan and named the town in Fulton's honor. The earliest deed that survives, for an Alexandria resident is from June 24, 1805 when a William Cochren who identifies himself as a \"of the Town of Alexandria\" sold a tract of land across the Red River to a William Murrey.[Louisiana State Land Office, Historical Records, Sales Documents, South Western District, Sales Letters, 39].\n\nThat same year Fulton was appointed coroner in Rapides Parish by territorial Governor William C.C. Claiborne. Alexandria was incorporated as a town in 1819 and received a city charter in 1832.\n\nIn the spring of 1863, Alexandria was occupied by Union forces under the command of Admiral David Dixon Porter and General Nathaniel P. Banks. Porter arrived with his gunboats on May 7. Later in the day Banks reached Alexandria with his cavalry, whose members had marched twenty-five miles to reach the city that day. According to the historian John D. Winters of Louisiana Tech University, Porter disliked Banks but nevertheless turned over Alexandria to him and then departed to rejoin General U.S. Grant at the ongoing siege of Vicksburg, Mississippi. Banks posted guards and declared martial law. Porter left behind the gunboat \"USS Lafayette\" in Alexandria and posted the \"USS Pittsburg\" on the Black River to the northeast.\n\nIn 1864, Admiral Porter, back in the area, and General Banks quarreled over possession of cotton supplies. Porter seized three hundred bales of Confederate cotton from various warehouses in Alexandria and stamped it \"U.S.N. prize\", referring to the United States Navy. Porter sent his sailors into the country to search for unginned cotton. After the crop was located, it was brought to Alexandria to be ginned and baled. The sailors also seized molasses and wool. Winters writes that Porter \"took all cotton wherever he found it, cotton belonging to the Confederate government, cotton belonging to the 'rebels,' and cotton belonging to 'loyal' citizens.\"\n\nWinters continues: \"Banks was furious with Porter when he learned that the admiral was scouring the interior for cotton. Since he had no authority to stop Porter's speculative activities, Banks could only try to beat him to the remaining cotton. Army wagons were sent out in large numbers to collect the cotton. Thousands of bales were brought in by the troops and stored for future shipment. Jealous of the abundant transportation facilities of the army, unprincipled navy men stole army wagons and teams at night, repainted the wagons, and branded the mules with navy initials, and dove deep in the country in search of cotton. . . . \"\n\nThe federal army made itself as comfortable as possible during its long stay in Alexandria. Winters writes that \"lumber and tools were foraged, and the men busied themselves by building wooden tent floors, benches, and furniture. . . . Alexandria [was enclosed] with a zigzag line of fortifications.\" While Banks remained in Alexandria in the spring of 1864, Porter was temporarily trapped north of the city because of the low level of the Red River, four feet instead of the needed seven feet to accommodate gunboats.\n\nConfederate citizens as a whole were most fearful of the Union. According to Winters, \"most [Confederates] had never before seen a Yankee soldier [and] expected the worse from the invader. . . . 'Some cried, some cursed, some whined; and some overcome with fear, hid themselves in the woods, leaving everything to the tender mercies of the army.' Negroes were responsible for much of the plunder and pillage. Negro camp followers and officers' servants roamed the plantations and small farms without hindrance, bringing in their booty to camps each afternoon. . . . \"\n\nOn May 13, 1864, when the Union decided to abandon Alexandria, the city was set afire despite General Banks' order to the contrary. Winters reports that \"burning and plundering\" by two Union corps, who set fire to a store on Front Street. Then \"a strong wind spread the flames rapidly from one building to the next.\" Banks later claimed that the fire \"broke out in the attic of one of the buildings on the levee inhabited by either soldiers or refugees.\" Winters reports that \"pandemonium reigned; frightened cows bellowed and charged through the flaming streets; squawking chickens with scorched wings tried to fly out of danger. Hundreds of women, children, and old people ran through the streets, trying to carry a few of their belongings to safety. When the heat became unbearable, they dropped their loads and fled to the levee. Thieves ran from house to house and even along the levee taking whatever they wanted from the shocked people. By noon the most congested parts of town were destroyed. An attempt to blow up a church in the path of the fire only succeeded in helping to spread the flames. . . . \"\n\nAlexandria faced the overwhelming task of rebuilding with a year of the war remaining. Prices became exorbitant; butter cost $10 a pound, bacon $5 a pound, flour $3 a pound, and a bushel of meal $10. Many of the helpless lived in the forest without food, shelter, or clothing, subsisting on blackberries. All clothing was homespun, and shoes were mostly made of cloth. While Admiral Porter expressed sympathy for the suffering Alexandria residents, he declared the \"burning of Alexandria a fit termination of the unfortunate Red River expedition.\"\n\nAlexandria is located at and has an elevation of .\n\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . 26.4 square miles (68.4 km²) of it is land and 0.6 square miles (1.5 km²) of it (2.15%) is water.\n\nAlexandria is on a level plain in the center of the Louisiana Longleaf Pine forests, in which pine is interspersed with various hardwoods. A number of small bayous, such as Bayou Rapides, Bayou Robert, and Hynson Bayou, meander throughout the city. In the immediate vicinity of the city, cotton, sugar, alfalfa, and garden vegetables are cultivated.\n\nThe climate is humid subtropical with some continental influence in the winter. Summers are consistently hot and humid, whereas winters are mild, with occasional cold snaps. On average, the first freeze occurs in early to mid November and the last freeze occurs in early to mid March. The area receives plentiful rainfall year-round, with thunderstorms possible throughout the year. Some storms can be severe, especially during the spring months. According to 'Cities Ranked and Rated' (Bert Sperling and Peter Sander), Alexandria reports an average of 69 days per year with thunder reported. This is nearly double the national average. Snowfall is rare, with measurable snow having occurred 27 times since 1895. The heaviest snowfall event took place February 12–13, 1960 when 9.1\" of snow fell.\n\nTropical storms and hurricanes do impact Alexandria from time to time, but rarely cause severe damage, unlike areas closer to the coast. In September 2005 Hurricane Rita affected Alexandria and surrounding areas, causing widespread power outages and damaging the roofs of some structures. The most recent hurricane, Gustav, caused widespread flooding, knocked over trees and power lines leading to power outages, and damaged structures. Some low-lying Alexandria neighborhoods experienced substantial flooding from Gustav with several feet of water in houses.\n\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 47,723 people, 17,816 households, and 11,722 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,754.6/sq mi (677.5/km²). There were 19,806 housing units at an average density of 749.9 per square mile (289.6/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 50.75% White, 40.60% Black, 1.25% Native American, 1.85% Asian, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 1.03% from other races, and 1.09% from two or more races. 6.98% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\n\nThere were 17,816 households out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.5% were married couples living together, 23.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.2% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.13.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 28.1% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 26.2% from 25 to 44, 21.4% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 83.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.7 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $26,097, and the median income for a family was $31,978. Males had a median income of $29,456 versus $20,154 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,242. About 23.2% of families and 27.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.7% of those under age 18 and 18.5% of those age 65 or over.\n\nLike many other southern cities, the largest single church denomination in the Alexandria area is Southern Baptist. Large congregations include Emmanuel Baptist Church downtown on Jackson Street and Calvary Baptist off Jackson Street Extension. Alexandria is headquarters too of the Louisiana Baptist Convention. A significant Roman Catholic population is also present, a result of the large Catholic Acadian French population which resides in and around Alexandria, many from neighboring Avoyelles Parish. Alexandria is the headquarters for the Diocese of Alexandria, Louisiana, which is headed by Bishop Ronald Herzog\n\nAlexandria also has a significant number of Methodists, Presbyterians, and Episcopalians. There is a large number of Pentecostals too. Alexandria has a small, though active Jewish community which dates back to the mid-19th century. Jews have consistently been leaders in government, civic organizations, education, and medicine. The long-time Alexandria City Council member, Harry B. Silver, is Jewish. From 1973 to 1977, another Jew, Arnold Jack Rosenthal, was the last commissioner of finance and utilities under the previous commission form of municipal government. At one time, many large businesses in the downtown werer Jewish-owned, with stores including: Wellan's, Caplan's, Bialy's, Weiss & Goldring, and Schwartzberg's. The Jewish community in Alexandria maintains two synagogues, which are approximately two blocks apart: Congregation Gemiluth Chassodim (Reform) and B'nai Israel Traditional Synagogue (Conservative).\n\nAs Alexandria is at the cusp of Cajun culture's extension to the north, the city recognizes Mardi Gras as an official holiday. The annual Mardi Gras Krewes Parade – occurring on the Sunday before Mardi Gras – on Texas Avenue is a major cultural festivity in the area. Boasted as a true family oriented event, parade goers can enjoy over 20 New Orleans style floats, high school and college marching bands, as well as appearances by local celebrities. In addition to the main Sunday parade, the College Cheerleaders & Classic Cars Parade, which recently was established in 2008, takes place downtown on the Friday before Mardi Gras, the Children's Parade as well takes place downtown on the Saturday before Mardi Gras, and the Krewe of Provine Parade which occurs on Fat Tuesday itself down Coliseum Boulevard. All the events are organized by the Alexandria Mardi Gras Association (AMGA). The Krewe Parade can attract from 120,000 to 150,000; the Children's parade, up to 40,000 to 50,000, and the College Cheerleaders & Classic Cars, about 5,000 to 15,000 people.\n\nAn annual three day festival held in downtown Alexandria around late April and early May. The festival, established in 2013, was created around a former successful stand alone event, the Louisiana Dragon Boat Races. It features the race and other former stand alone events such as Dinner on the Bricks and the ArtWalk (now Art Fête) along with various booth venues, food, and live music as well as the Kids Fête and Classic Car Fête.\n\nAn annual three day festival held in downtown Alexandria around early December. Launched in 2015, the festival first year drew about double the anticipated crowd of 15,000. The festival, like the Alex River Fête, feature booth venues, food, and live music but also features an ice rink. In January 2017, the Alex Winter Fête was voted Festival of the Year by the Louisiana Travel Promotion Association.\n\nBegun in the late 1980s, Cenlabration\nwas one of the largest festivals in Central Louisiana (Cenla). The name comes from Central Louisiana (\"LA\") Celebration, and reflects local culture and heritage, as well as serving as a means of celebrating Labor Day as the end of summer.\n\nAs many as three stages support a particular type of music, including Cajun and zydeco, blues and jazz, and Country music. In addition there are arts and crafts booths for local artists to sell their wares. In the Children's Village, children can participate in arts and crafts, listen to storytellers, play games with clowns, or watch a play. The festival has plenty of carnival rides available as well. Cenlabration ends with a large fireworks display.\n\nThe festival ran for 20 years until cancellation due to financial struggles as its only financial support of $40,000 annual city subsides was ceased.\n\nIn 2002, representatives of local government, businesses, organizations, and community formed the nonprofit organization River Cities Cultural Alliance, Inc. to promote tourism and the arts through a celebration of Central Louisiana’s diverse cultural heritage. The nonprofit served to organize and put on RiverFest: Heritage and Arts on the Red. More than ten thousand festival-goers attending the event.\n\nRiverFest was held in downtown Alexandria and on the Alexandria and Pineville levees. The festival features the work of visual artists from across the South, food booths exemplifying southern cuisine, a variety of children’s activities, three outdoor stages with a wide range of music, dance, and theatrical performances, and a literary component with readings and panel discussions by Louisiana authors and scholars.\n\nRiverFest was canceled in 2007.\n\nAn annual barbecue festival launched in 2006. The festival was held on the levee near downtown Alexandria and was well known for its big-name entertainment. The event was cancelled in 2012 due to its high cost and the city electing not to allocate $100,000-plus needed to fund the festival.\n\nThe Alexandria Museum of Art was founded in 1977 and occupies an historic Rapides Bank Building on the banks of the Red River. The building was constructed built c. 1898 and is listed on the National Historic Register. It opened to the public in March 1998. In 1998, the Alexandria Museum of Art expanded and constructed its grand foyer and offices as an annex to the Rapides Bank Building. In 1999, the Alexandria Museum of Art was honored as an Outstanding Arts Organization in the Louisiana Governor's Arts Awards. In 2007, the Alexandria Museum of Art entered into a collaborative endeavor agreement with Louisiana State University of Alexandria (LSUA). The Alexandria Museum of Art now also serves as a downtown campus for LSUA classes, and is host to multidisciplinary community events, including concerts and recitals, lectures, yoga classes, Second Saturday Markets, and Museum Afterhours.\n\nThe Louisiana History Museum is located downtown on the bottom floor of the former library. A small facility, it showcases the history of all Louisiana, with emphasis on the central portion of the state, Rapides Parish, and Alexandria. Major exhibit areas concern Native Americans, Louisiana geography, politics, health care, farming, and the impact of war.\n\nThe T.R.E.E. House Children's Museum and Arna Bontemps African American Museum are located within the Cultural Arts District.\n\nThe Kent Plantation House in Alexandria, completed by 1800, was located on a Spanish land grant. It is the oldest standing structure in Central Louisiana, one of only two buildings in the city to survive the burning of 1864 by Union troops fleeing after having been defeated at the Battle of Mansfield in DeSoto Parish. The house has been moved from its original location but still stands on part of the first land grant. It is open for tours daily except Sundays at 9, 10, and 11 a.m. and 1, 2, and 3 p.m. The tour is led by costumed docents and includes the house furnished in period pieces, some belonging to the original family, and all nine outbuildings, including an 1840-50s sugar mill, blacksmith shop, barn, two slave cabins, open-hearth kitchen, and milk house.\n\nThe performing arts are centered in the Alexandria Cultural Arts District in the downtowna. Located within a few blocks of each other are three performance venues: Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center, the Hearn Stage, and the Riverfront Amphitheater.\n\nThe Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center is the home of the Rapides Symphony Orchestra, which has performed in Alexandria since 1968. The center hosts the Performing Arts Series of the Arts Council of Central Louisiana, the Red River Chorale (an auditioned community chorus), and presentations of numerous local theater groups. The land for the center was donated by \"The Alexandria Town Talk\" newspaper, owned by the Gannett Company of McLean, Virginia.\n\nBusinesswoman Jacqueline Seagall Caplan (1935-2016) was the president of the Arts Council of Central Louisiana and the chairman of the group's executive committee when the Coughlin-Saunders Performing Arts Center opened in 2004. She predicted that Coughlin-Saunders would in time \"provide a place people can point to and say it's theirs. ... [Until now], we've never had a performing arts center where every type of performing art can come.\"\n\nThe Hearn Stage is a black box theater for smaller productions. The Arts Council provides day-to-day management of both the Coughlin-Saunders Center and the Hearn Stage.\n\nThe Riverfront Aamphitheater hosts each April a \"azz on the River\"music festival, sponsored by the Arna Bontemps African American Museum. The Rapides Symphony holds an annual fall Pops concert in the amphitheater. In recent years, the amphitheater has welcomed musical guests in conjunction with the springtime Dragonboat Races sponsored by the Alexandria Museum of Art.\n\nThe spring and fall seasons also feature Downtown Rocks, a free outdoor concert series in nearby Fulton Park.\n\nAlexandria was home to the Alexandria Aces, a summer college league team. The Aces were champions in various leagues in 1997, 1998, 2006, and 2007. They play their home games at Bringhurst Field. The remaining games of the 2013 season were cancelled in mid-July because of low attendance, which averaged fewer than two hundred per game.\n\nAlexandria was also home to the Cenla Derby Dames, a roller derby team that operates under the Women's Flat Track Derby Association. The Dames played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum.\n\nNearby is Bringhurst Golf Course, popularly known as \"the nation's oldest par three course.\" A full-scale renovation was completed in mid-2010. In addition to Bringhurst, named for the late industrialist R.W. Bringhurst, Alexandria is home to four other golf courses: Oak Wing, The Links on the Bayou, at LSUA, and Alexandria Golf and Country Club.\n\nAlexandria once had a minor league ice hockey team, the Alexandria Warthogs. They played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum.\n\nThere was also a semi-pro football team, the Louisiana Rapides Rangers, who played their home games at the Rapides Parish Coliseum. They played in the Central District of the Southern American Football League, and the Southern Conference of the National Indoor Football League (NIFL). The team was owned by a Lafayette business group before moving in 2003 to Beaumont, Texas.\n\nIn 1974, a Little League team from Alexandria won the Louisiana state championship.\n\nAlexandria is also home to the U-14 Crossroads Pride soccer team. They won the 2012 Louisiana Soccer Association State Cup.\n\n\nhttp://www.legacy.com/obituaries/thetowntalk/obituary.aspx?n=patrick-mccauley&pid=174641302&fhid=5535#sthash.LF5SOogF.dpuf|title=Patrick McCauley|date=April 16, 2015|publisher=\"Alexandria Town Talk\"|accessdate=May 17, 2015}}</ref>\n\nEstablished March 17, 1883, The Alexandria Town Talk is a daily newspaper for Alexandria-Pineville and the thirteen parishes which comprise central Louisiana. The newspaper was owned by the family of the late Jane Wilson Smith and Joe D. Smith, Jr., until March 1996, when it was sold to Central Newspapers. In August 2000, the Gannett Company acquired the Central Newspapers properties, including \"The Town Talk\". The name of the paper on its inaugural issue was the \"Alexandria Daily Town Talk\". Although it has since been shorted to the current \"The Town Talk\", it is still frequently referred to by long-time residents as the \"Daily Town Talk\".\n\nKey officers include: Publisher William \"Ed\" Humphrey; Executive Editor Paul V. Carty; Advertising Director William \"Bill\" Heirtzler; and Assistant Managing Editors John Marcase and Richard Powell Sharkey.\n\nAlexandria is served by local television stations KALB-TV (NBC / CBS), WNTZ (Fox), KLAX-TV (ABC), KLPA (PBS/LPB), and KBCA (The CW). KALB is the oldest television station in central Louisiana.\n\nAlexandria is the location of the pawn shop in the show Cajun Pawn Stars on the History Channel.\n\nLocal radio stations\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThe Alexandria Zoological Park is a zoo first opened to the public in 1926. Owned by the City of Alexandria and operated by the Division of Public Works, it is home to about 500 animals and includes an award-winning Louisiana Habitat exhibit. Much of the credit for the quality of the zoo has been given to Robert Leslie Whitt (1951–2008), who served as director for 34 years prior to his death. Whitt was hired in 1974 by then Streets and Parks Commissioner Malcolm Hebert. The zoo is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) and takes part in about 20 Species Survival Plans (SSP) as part of its conservation efforts.\n\nCotile Lake is a man-made impoundment located in the uplands approximately west-northwest of Alexandria, Louisiana. The lake is approximately in size and was completed in October 1965. The Louisiana Wild Life and Fisheries Commission stocked this impoundment with the proper species and number of game fish in 1965–66 shortly after its completion date. The recreational facilities include a large area cleared and zoned for swimming with complete bath house facilities nearby. There is a water skiing area that is cleared and snagged for safety of the skiers. The picnic and camping areas are modern and complete. There is also space available for campers.\n\nEncompasses a lake, of developed recreation facilities and a primitive camping area all within the Alexander State Forest. The lake, located in central Louisiana, was constructed as a joint venture of the Louisiana Forestry Commission, the Rapides Parish Police Jury, and the Lower West Red River Soil and Water Conservation District as a reservoir for agricultural irrigation in times of need and for recreation purposes.\n\nThe recreation area camping area contains 109 campsites with conventional full utility hookups, 3 beaches for swimming, bath houses, a boat launch, and 75 picnic sites. A covered pavilion within the developed area provides for groups up to 100 people. The recreation area is open year-round and operates on user fees.\n\nAlexandria sits in the middle of the Kisatchie National Forest. Ranger districts are north, northwest, west and southwest of the city. An abundance of large timberlands and forest nurseries, as well as lake and recreation areas, are within a short driving distance.\n\n\nAlexandria is home to both Headquarters and Company B of the 199th Brigade Support Battalion (BSB). The 199th BSB is the logistical component of the 256th Infantry Brigade that served in Operation Iraqi Freedom from October 2004 until September 2005. The 199th BSB provides supply and transportation (Company A), medical (Company C) and maintenance (Company B) support and services that keep the 256th Brigade operational. The battalion also has units located in Jonesboro, Winnfield, Colfax, and St. Martinville, Louisiana.\n\nAlexandria served as the home of England Air Force Base from its origins as an emergency airstrip for Esler Regional Airport until its closure. England AFB was officially closed on December 15, 1992, pursuant to the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 101-510) and recommendations of the Defense Secretary's Commission on Base Realignment and Closure. The base now serves as Alexandria International Airport (see below).\nAt the time of the 2000 census, the per capita income in Alexandria was $16,242, compared with $21,587 nationally. The Alexandria workforce consists of about 55,000 residents. Union Tank Car Company has recently located a plant northwest of Alexandria near the airport creating hundreds of jobs. Expansions at the Procter & Gamble plant and the construction of a PlastiPak plant in nearby Pineville have also created a number of new jobs for the area. Sundrop Fuels Inc., a Colorado-based biofuels start-up, plans to construct an over 1,200 acre plant just northwest of Alexandria in Rapides Station area. The facility will serve as the headquarters for the company because aside from the plant itself, Sundrop has also bought Cowboy Town, an abandon entertainment venue that sits inside the surrounding land that was purchased, to house their offices and their maintenance and fabrication operations.\n\nIn 2007, Inc. Magazine rated Alexandria as the 77th best place in which to conduct business out of the 393 U.S. cities ranked, a significant increase from its ranking as No. 276 in 2006. Among other Louisiana cities, Alexandria ranked second, following only Baton Rouge, which ranked 59th nationally.\n\nAlexandria is home to two major hospitals: Rapides Regional Medical Center, a former Baptist hospital is located downtown. Christus St. Frances Cabrini Hospital was opened in 1950 and is located at the corner of Masonic Drive and Texas Avenue. Both hospitals have undergone expansion.\n\nAdditionally, located just across the Red River in Pineville, the Veteran's Affairs Medical Center at Alexandria serves central Louisiana and surrounding areas.\n\nMeanwhile, in 2013, the state allocated $15 million to move the medical services long provided at no or minimal charge at the Huey P. Long Medical Center in Pineville to the former hospital at England Park at the site of the closed England Air Force Base.\n\nIn the early 19th century, the Port of Alexandria brought goods to the area and shipped cotton and other local products to the rest of the country. A ferry connected the cities of Alexandria and Pineville until a bridge was built across the Red in 1900.\n\nToday, Port facilities include: a 40-ton crane for off-loading, a warehouse, 13,600-ton bulk fertilizer warehouse, a 3,400-ton bulk fertilizer dome structure and a 5,000-ton dome which was added in January 2005.\n\nThe petroleum off-loading facility includes two tanks, one tank capable of handling two barges and five truck off-loading simultaneously. There is also a general cargo dock with access to rail and a hopper barge unloading dock with conveyor system.\n\nToday's modern facilities and the Port's central location with its connection to the Mississippi River provide excellent opportunities for importers and exporters.\n\nAlexandria International Airport (AEX) is a regional airport, providing flights to Atlanta,Dallas/Ft. Worth, and Houston. In 2006 a new-state-of-the-art passenger terminal was dedicated. Alexandria is served by American, United, and Delta.\n\nFormerly known as England AFB until 1992, Alexandria International Airport additionally has numerous international charter airlines use the airport in the transport of military personnel attached to the United States Army base at Fort Polk. A new military personnel terminal opened in 2007.\n\nDowntown Alexandria, including the Alexandria Cultural Arts District, is currently in the process of revitalization. It is home to five museums, three performance venues, and several galleries. In recent years, several bars, cafes, and restaurants have opened.\n\nAcross the street from the venues is the Hotel Bentley. The Bentley was built in 1908 by lumberman and local eccentric Joseph A. Bentley. The Bentley's heyday was during the 1940s and 1950s, when senior military officials, including General Dwight D. Eisenhower, stayed for extended periods. The Bentley, which was closed on December 12, 2004, was once one of only two four-star hotels in Louisiana. The hotel was set to reopen in August 2007, in time for the 100th anniversary of its construction, but was prevented by funding issues. The current owner, Michael Jenkins, purchased the Bentley for $3.4 million. His plan is to keep the older portion of the building to remain a hotel and turn the 7-storey tower portion into luxury condominiums, and also to reopen Bentley's restaurant and Mirror Room lounge. The hotel and all of its components were to have been opened by the summer of 2013, but the hotel remained unfinished as of November 2014.\n\nCentral Alexandria is bounded by MacArthur Drive, Masonic Drive, Mason Street, the Alexandria-Pineville Expressway, and the Red River.\n\nNorthwestern Alexandria comprises the area north of Louisiana Highway 28 West and MacArthur Drive and south of the Red River.\n\nWestern Alexandria is the area south of Highway 28 West, west of MacArthur Drive, and north of Versailles Boulevard and Metro Drive\n\nAlexandria real estate broker Robert Andrew Wolf, Jr. (1930-2016), designed The Centre and other local and regional developments, including the Walmart SuperCenter on Louisiana Highway 28 West, the Melrose Plantation in Natchitoches Parish with partner John Wasson, at which once lived the author Francois Mignon and the painter Clementine Hunter, and the site of what became the Union Tank Car Company near England Airpark, formerly part of England Air Force Base. In 1967, he and Wasson designed the Wedgewood subdivision in Alexandria; in 1970, they sold Melrose. Wolf was a past president of the Alexandria-Pineville Board of Realtors and in 1984 was named \"Realtor of the Year\".\n\nSouthwestern Alexandria comprises the area west of Masonic Drive and south of Versailles Boulevard and Metro Drive.\n\nSouthern Alexandria is located east of Masonic Drive and south of MacArthur Drive\n\nSoutheastern Alexandria contains the area northeast of MacArthur Drive, south of Masonic Drive, Mason Street, and Alexandria-Pineville Expressway, and bordered by the Red River.\n\nRapides Parish\n\n\nGrant Parish\n\nFollowing the Civil War, all public records in Alexandria had been destroyed. On September 29, 1868, the city was granted a new charter with a government consisting of a Mayor, Treasurer, and Justice of the Peace. Nine aldermen represented the four wards of the city – two from each ward and one elected at-large.\n\nIn 1912, the Lawrason Act established Alexandria municipal government in a strong mayor format, where the mayor was also the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety (Police, Fire, Sanitation). There were separate Commissioners of Streets and Parks and Finance and Utilities, elected citywide. The last to hold those positions, which ended in 1977, were Mayor John K. Snyder (1922–1993), Malcolm P. Hebert, Sr. (1926–2006), and Arnold Jack Rosenthal (1923–2010), respectively.\n\nAlexandria has a mayoral-council system of government. The Mayor serves as the executive branch of the local government. The current Mayor – Jacques Roy – was elected to office in November 2006, succeeding long-time mayor Edward Gordon \"Ned\" Randolph, Jr. Randolph had succeeded John K. Snyder.\n\nThe City Council serves as the legislative branch. The five districts of the city are represented on the Council; in addition there are two council members elected to serve as at-large representatives of the city.\n\nThe Alexandria Court has a limited jurisdiction, consisting of the citizens of Wards 1, 2 and 8 in Rapides Parish. Within those boundaries the court has the power to hear and decide both criminal and civil cases, rule in civil cases and hand down judgment for punishment in criminal cases.\n\nOverall, the people of the Alexandria area tend to be conservative. Even though the majority typically elects Republicans in national elections, they vote for Democrats in local elections, many of which are not contested by the GOP.\n\nFrom 1913 to 1993, Alexandria served as the seat of Louisiana's Eighth Congressional district. A Democratic seat, it was held by the Long family for nearly half of its existence, from 1953 to 1987, broken only by the two terms of Harold B. McSween and three terms of Republican Clyde Holloway of Forest Hill. The seat was removed after the 1990 census indicated Louisiana no longer had the population to support it. The district was split among the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Congressional districts. Alexandria is now in the Fifth district and was represented from 2003 to 2013 by Rodney Alexander, a Democrat-turned-Republican. From November 2013 to January 2015 the representative is Vance McAllister of Ouachita Parish.\n\nSituated south of the city, Louisiana State University at Alexandria (or LSUA) is a regional campus of the state's flagship university system, Louisiana State University. From its establishment in 1959, the campus offered only two-year degrees; students seeking baccalaureate degrees had to commute or move to the main campus in Baton Rouge in order to gain a four-year degree. After 1976, students could either commute or telecommute in order to attend upper level courses, including graduate classes. In 2002, following approval by the Louisiana State University Board of Supervisors and the Louisiana Board of Regents the Louisiana Legislature passed legislation allowing LSUA to offer baccalaureate degrees.\n\nA four-year degree is also attainable through Southern Baptist-affiliated Louisiana College in Pineville, founded in 1906.\n\nAlexandria also has one of the Region 6 Louisiana Technical College campuses.\n\nRapides Parish School Board operates public schools.\n\nAlexandria has three public high schools: Bolton High School, Alexandria Senior High School, and Peabody Magnet High School. In addition, there are two private high schools: the Roman Catholic Holy Savior Menard Central High School, and Grace Christian.\n\nThe Renaissance Home for Youth west of Alexandria is a haven for youthful offenders who live in a group-home setting as an alternative to reform school or adult jail. Since the facility opened in 1973, nearly 12 thousand young people have lived at the home in search of rehabilitation.\n\nAlfred Booker Junior Academy proudly follows faith- centered education for all students Pre-Kindergarten through eighth grade.\n\nAlexandria serves as the crossroads of Louisiana. To reach either Shreveport or Monroe from the southern portion of the state, the easiest method of travel takes the driver through Alexandria. Likewise, if a visitor is to head from the northern portion of the state to the Cajun portions of the state (Lake Charles and Lafayette), or the greater metropolitan areas of either Baton Rouge or New Orleans, the easiest method of travel involves driving down Interstate 49 through Alexandria.\n\nIn addition to I-49, travelers can follow Louisiana 1 up to Alexandria from Baton Rouge and points south. Also, Highway 167 could be taken from Opelousas north to Monroe, crossing through Alexandria at one of the few bridges over the Red River in central Louisiana. Highways 165 and 71 also link Alexandria and points south with the northern portion of the state via the OK Allen bridge.\n\nThere are possible plans for a 50-mile, 4 lane beltway to encircle Alexandria and Pineville. As of now, it is only in the planning stages of development.\n\nThree road bridges cross the Red River in the Alexandria area. They are:\n\nFormer bridges include:\n\nThere are two railroad bridges over the Red River in Alexandria. One is located near the Buhlow area north of the OK Allen bridge. The other is south of the Purple Heart Memorial Bridge.\n\nRegional mass transit is handled by ATRANS (Alexandria Transportation Authority).\n\nFor those leaving or arriving at the city by bus, Greyhound Lines has a terminal downtown.\n\nAlexandria is served by the Alexandria International Airport and the Esler Regional Airport in Pineville.\n\nAlexandria does not have Amtrak service, nor a commuter rail system. The Kansas City Southern and the Missouri Pacific (since absorbed by Union Pacific) operated train stations in the area in the early part of the 20th century but these have since closed.\n\n"}
{"id": "3085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3085", "title": "Alexandria Troas", "text": "Alexandria Troas\n\nAlexandria Troas (\"Alexandria of the Troad\"; ; ) is the site of an ancient Greek city situated on the Aegean Sea near the northern tip of Turkey's western coast, a little south of Tenedos (modern Bozcaada). It is located southeast of modern Dalyan, a village in the Ezine district of Çanakkale Province. The site sprawls over an estimated ; among the few structures remaining today are a ruined bath, an odeon, a theatre, gymnasium complex and a recently uncovered stadion. The circuit of the old walls can still be traced.\n\nAccording to Strabo, this site was first called Sigeia; around 306 BC Antigonus refounded the city as the much-expanded Antigonia Troas by settling the people of five other towns in Sigeia, including the once influential city of Neandreia. It did not receive its name until its name was changed by Lysimachus to Alexandria Troas, in 301 BC, in memory of Alexander III of Macedon (Pliny merely states, in his view, that the name changed from Antigonia to Alexandria). However, Pliny's view is not correct, because the city continued being called Alexandria Troas, and so is also stated in the 4th-5th c. AD Tabula Peutingeriana. As the chief port of north-west Asia Minor, the place prospered greatly in Roman times, becoming a \"free and autonomous city\" as early as 188 BC, and the existing remains sufficiently attest its former importance. In its heyday the city may have had a population of about 100,000. Strabo mentions that a Roman colony was created at the location in the reign of Augustus, named Colonia Alexandria Augusta Troas (called simply Troas during this period). Augustus, Hadrian and the rich grammarian Herodes Atticus contributed greatly to its embellishment; the aqueduct still preserved is due to the latter. Constantine considered making Troas the capital of the Roman Empire.\n\nIn Roman times, it was a significant port for travelling between Anatolia and Europe. Paul of Tarsus sailed for Europe for the first time from Alexandria Troas and returned there from Europe (it was there that the episode of the raising of Eutychus later occurred). Ignatius of Antioch also paused at this city before continuing to his martyrdom at Rome.\n\nSeveral of its later bishops are known: Marinus in 325; Niconius in 344; Sylvanus at the beginning of the 5th century; Pionius in 451; Leo in 787; Peter, friend of the Patriarch Ignatius, and adversary to Michael, in the ninth century. In the 10th century Troas is given as a suffragan of Cyzicus and distinct from the famous Troy (Heinrich Gelzer, \"Ungedruckte ... Texte der Notitiae episcopatuum\", 552; \"Georgii Cyprii descriptio orbis romani\", 64); it is not known when the city was destroyed and the diocese disappeared. The bishopric remains a titular see of the Catholic Church under the name Troas, vacant since 1971.\n\nTroas is also a titular see of the Orthodox Church under the Ecumenical Patriarchate. Bishop Savas (Zembillas) of Troas served as hierarch from 2002 to 2011, and then became Metropolitan Savas (Zembillas) of Pittsburgh in the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America.\n\nKarasid Turkomans settled in the area of the Troad in the 14th century. Their \"beylik\" was conquered by the Ottomans in 1336. The ruins of Alexandria Troas came to be known among the Turks as \"Eski Stambul\", the \"Old City\". The site's stones were much plundered for building material (for example Mehmed IV took columns to adorn his Yeni Valide Mosque in Istanbul). As of the mid-18th century the site served as \"a lurking place for bandetti\".\n\nBy 1911, the site had been overgrown with vallonea oaks and much plundered, but the circuit of the old walls could still be traced, and in several places they were fairly well preserved. \nThey had a circumference of about ten kilometres, and were fortified with towers at regular intervals.\nRemains of an ancient bath and gymnasium complex can be found within this area; this building is locally known as \"Bal Saray\" (Honey Palace) and was originally endowed by Herodes Atticus in the year 135. Trajan built an aqueduct which can still be traced. \nThe harbour had two large basins, now almost choked with sand. \nIt is the subject of an early twenty-first century study by German archaeologists digging and surveying at the site. \nTheir excavation uncovered the remains of a large stadium dating to about 100 BC.\n\n"}
{"id": "3087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3087", "title": "Alexandria, West Dunbartonshire", "text": "Alexandria, West Dunbartonshire\n\nAlexandria (, ) is a town in West Dunbartonshire, Scotland. The town is situated on the River Leven, four miles (6 km) north-west of Dumbarton.\n\nIn 2001, the population of the town was 13,444. It is the largest town in the Vale of Leven, the others being Balloch, Bonhill, Jamestown and Renton; their combined population is over 20,000.\n\nThe town's traditional industries, most importantly cotton manufacturing, bleaching and printing, have been phased out. The town was redeveloped in the 1970s with a new town centre layout and traffic system. Local landmarks include Christie Park, and the Fountain in the town centre. Lomond Galleries on North Main Street is a former car factory with an impressive dome and an even more impressive marble entrance hall and staircase. It was originally built in 1906 as the Argyll Motor Works, for Argyll Motors Ltd. A carving above the entrance shows one of the company's cars. After the car production ceased in 1914 it was used by the Admiralty for the manufacture of torpedoes, which were test-fired in Loch Long, and in the early 1970s was the scene of the Plessey sit-in. \n\nAlexandria sits on the former A82 main road between Glasgow and Loch Lomond. There are regular bus services on the route and the town has a railway station on the rail line between Balloch and Glasgow Queen Street.\n\nThe town is reputed to be the only UK town with a railway station and a pub in the middle of a roundabout. A. J. Cronin's uncle owned a pub in Bridge Street. Alexandria Library is located on Gilmour Street. \n\nThe town is home to Vale of Leven football club, who play at Millburn Park. The club were a dominant force in early Scottish football history, winning the Scottish Cup in 1877, 1878 and 1879, and were founder members of the Scottish Football League.\n"}
{"id": "3088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3088", "title": "Alexandria, Romania", "text": "Alexandria, Romania\n\nAlexandria () is the capital city of the Teleorman County, Romania. It is located south-west of Bucharest, towards the Bulgarian border. The city is situated on the Vedea River and has 45,434 inhabitants.\n\nAlexandria was named after its founder, Alexandru II Ghica, prince of Wallachia from 1834 to 1842.\nIts population in 1900 was 1,675. Its chief trade then was in grain, dispatched by rail to the Danubian port of Zimnicea, or by river to Giurgiu.\n\nIn 1989, the city had over 63,000 people and more than six large factories.\n\n"}
{"id": "3089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3089", "title": "Angela Vincent", "text": "Angela Vincent\n\nAngela Vincent (born 1942) is a professor at Somerville College of Oxford University. She is the head of a research group, which is located in the West Wing within the John Radcliffe Hospital, and works on a wide range of biological disciplines encompassing molecular biology, biochemistry, cellular immunology and intracellular neurophysiology. The group's research is focused on autoimmune and genetic disorders of the neuromuscular junction, peripheral nerves and more recently the exciting field of central nervous system diseases. The principal autoimmune diseases studied are myasthenia gravis, the Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome, limbic encephalitis, other types of autoimmune encephalitis and acquired neuromyotonia.\n\nHer contributions are mainly on the roles of antibodies directed against ion channels, proteins complexed to ion channels, such as LGI1, CASPR2 and Contactin-2, within neurons, glia and the nerve-muscle junction in the pathogenesis of above-mentioned diseases.\n\nShe has demonstrated that transfer of these antibodies across the placenta from the pregnant woman to the fetus in utero can cause developmental abnormalities. She has also worked on the principal gene mutations causing neuromuscular diseases.\n\nIn 2009 she presented the Leslie Oliver Oration at Queen's Hospital. In 2011, she was made a FRS.\n\n"}
{"id": "3090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3090", "title": "Arithmetic–geometric mean", "text": "Arithmetic–geometric mean\n\nIn mathematics, the arithmetic–geometric mean (AGM) of two positive real numbers and is defined as follows:\n\nFirst, compute the arithmetic and geometric means of and , calling them and respectively (the latter is the principal square root of the product ):\n\nThen, use iteration, with taking the place of and taking the place of . In this way, two sequences and are defined:\n\nThese two sequences converge to the same number, which is the arithmetic–geometric mean of and ; it is denoted by , or sometimes by .\n\nThis can be used for algorithmic purposes as in the AGM method, which makes it possible to construct fast algorithms for calculating exponential and trigonometric functions, as well as some mathematical constants, in particular, to quickly compute formula_3.\n\nTo find the arithmetic–geometric mean of and , first calculate their arithmetic and geometric means, thus:\n\nand then iterate as follows:\n\nThe first five iterations give the following values:\n\nAs can be seen, the number of digits in agreement (underlined) approximately doubles with each iteration. The arithmetic–geometric mean of 24 and 6 is the common limit of these two sequences, which is approximately 13.4581714817256154207668131569743992430538388544.\n\nThe first algorithm based on this sequence pair appeared in the works of Lagrange. Its properties were further analyzed by Gauss.\n\nThe geometric mean of two positive numbers is never bigger than the arithmetic mean (see inequality of arithmetic and geometric means); as a consequence, is an increasing sequence, is a decreasing sequence, and . These are strict inequalities if .\n\nIf , then .\n\nThere is an integral-form expression for :\n\nwhere is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind:\n\nIndeed, since the arithmetic–geometric process converges so quickly, it provides an efficient way to compute elliptic integrals via this formula. In engineering, it is used for instance in elliptic filter design.\n\nThe reciprocal of the arithmetic–geometric mean of 1 and the square root of 2 is called Gauss's constant, after Carl Friedrich Gauss.\n\nThe geometric–harmonic mean can be calculated by an analogous method, using sequences of geometric and harmonic means. The arithmetic–harmonic mean can be similarly defined, but takes the same value as the geometric mean.\n\nThe arithmetic–geometric mean can be used to compute – among others – logarithms, complete and incomplete elliptic integrals of the first and second kind, and Jacobi elliptic functions.\n\nFrom the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means we can conclude that:\n\nand thus\n\nthat is, the sequence is nondecreasing.\n\nFurthermore, it is easy to see that it is also bounded above by the larger of and (which follows from the fact that both the arithmetic and geometric means of two numbers lie between them). Thus, by the monotone convergence theorem, the sequence is convergent, so there exists a such that:\n\nHowever, we can also see that:\n\nand so:\n\nQ.E.D.\n\nThis proof is given by Gauss.\nLet\n\nChanging the variable of integration to formula_15, where\n\ngives\n\nThus, we have\n\nThe last equality comes from observing that formula_19.\n\nFinally, we obtain the desired result\n\nGauss noticed that the sequences\n\nas\n\nhave the same limit:\nthe arithmetic–geometric mean, \"agm\".\n\nIt is possible to use this fact to construct fast algorithms for calculating elementary transcendental functions and some classical constants, in particular, the constant .\n\nFor example, according to the Gauss–Salamin formula:\n\nwhere\n\nwhich can be computed without loss of precision using\n\nTaking formula_27 , yields the \"agm\",\nwhere is a complete elliptic integral of the first kind,\nThat is to say that this quarter period may be efficiently computed through the \"agm\",\n\nUsing this property of the AGM along with the ascending transformations of Landen, Richard Brent suggested the first AGM algorithms for the fast evaluation of elementary transcendental functions (\"e\", cos \"x\", sin \"x\"). Subsequently, many authors went on to study the use of the AGM algorithms.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3092", "title": "Akira Toriyama", "text": "Akira Toriyama\n\nHe earned the 1981 Shogakukan Manga Award for best \"shōnen\" or \"shōjo\" manga with \"Dr. Slump\", and it went on to sell over 35 million copies in Japan. It was adapted into a successful anime series, with a second anime created in 1997, 13 years after the manga ended. His next series, \"Dragon Ball\", would become one of the most popular and successful manga in the world. Having sold more than 240 million copies worldwide, it is the second best-selling manga of all time and is considered to be one of the main reasons for the period when manga circulation was at its highest in the mid-1980s and mid-1990s. Overseas, \"Dragon Ball\"s anime adaptations have been more successful than the manga and are credited with boosting anime's popularity in the Western world.\n\nAkira Toriyama was born in Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. He has recalled that when he was in elementary school all of his classmates drew, imitating anime and manga, as a result of not having many forms of entertainment. He believes that he began to advance above everyone else when he started drawing pictures of his friends, and after winning a prize at the local art studio for a picture of \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\", began to think \"art was fun\".\n\nBefore becoming a manga artist, he worked at an advertising agency in Nagoya designing posters for three years. After quitting his previous job, Toriyama entered the manga industry by submitting a work to an amateur contest in a \"Jump\" magazine in order to win the prize money. While it did not win, Kazuhiko Torishima, who would later become his editor, contacted him and gave him encouragement. His debut came later in 1978 with the story \"Wonder Island\", which was published in \"Weekly Shōnen Jump\". However, he did not rise to popularity until the comedy series \"Dr. Slump\", which was serialized in \"Weekly Shōnen Jump\" from 1980 to 1984. It follows the adventures of a perverted professor and his small but super-strong robot Arale. He began the series at age 25 while living at home with his parents, but when the series ended in 1984 he was a \"manga superstar\". In 1981, \"Dr. Slump\" earned him the Shogakukan Manga Award for best \"shōnen\" or \"shōjo\" manga series of the year. A very successful anime adaptation aired on TV from 1981 to 1986, with a remake series airing from 1997 to 1999. By 2008, the manga had sold over 35 million copies in Japan.\n\nIn 1984, \"Weekly Shōnen Jump\" began serializing Toriyama's \"Dragon Ball\", which became an instant hit. To date it has sold over 156 million copies in Japan alone, making it Shueisha's second best-selling manga of all time. It began as an adventure/gag manga but later turned into a martial arts fighting series, considered by many to be the \"most influential \"shōnen\" manga\". \"Dragon Ball\" was one of the main reasons for the magazine's circulation hitting a record high of 6.53 million copies (1995). The series' success encouraged Toriyama to continue working on it from 1984 to 1995. At the series' end, Toriyama said that he asked everyone involved to let him end the manga, so he could \"take some new steps in life\". During that 11-year period, he produced 519 chapters that were collected into 42 volumes. Moreover, the success of the manga led to five anime adaptations, several animated movies, numerous video games, and mega-merchandising. The third anime adaptation, \"Dragon Ball GT\", was not based on his manga; however, Toriyama was still involved in coming up with the name and designing the main cast. Although the fifth, \"Dragon Ball Super\", is also not based on the manga, Toriyama is credited with its story and character designs. Aside from its popularity in Japan, \"Dragon Ball\" was successful internationally as well, including in Europe and North America, with a total of 240 million copies of the manga sold worldwide.\n\nToriyama's design sense led to a position designing characters for the popular \"Dragon Quest\" series of role-playing video games (formerly called \"Dragon Warrior\" in North America). He has also served as the character designer for the Super Famicom RPG \"Chrono Trigger\" and for the fighting games \"Tobal No. 1\" and \"Tobal 2\" for the PlayStation.\n\nToriyama's own studio is called Bird Studio, which is a play on his name; meaning \"bird\". Toriyama does nearly all of the work at Bird Studio himself, and even when he employed an assistant (until 1995, and only one at a time, which is itself rare for manga artists), the assistant did mostly backgrounds. The studio founded in 1983 has produced occasional one-shots, or stand-alone manga that are not serialized, and some other design work. Toriyama's manga after \"Dragon Ball\" tend to be short (100–200-page) stories, including \"Cowa!\", \"Kajika\", and \"Sand Land\".\n\nOn December 6, 2002, Toriyama made his only promotional appearance in the United States at the launch of \"Weekly Shōnen Jump\"'s North American counterpart, \"Shonen Jump\", in New York City. Toriyama's \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Sand Land\" were published in the magazine in the first issue, which also included an in-depth interview with him.\n\nOn March 27, 2005, CQ Motors began selling an electric car designed by Toriyama. The one-person QVOLT is part of the company's Choro-Q series of small electric cars, with only 9 being produced. It costs 1,990,000 yen (about $19,000 US), has a top speed of and is available in 5 colors. Designed to look like an American street rod, the QVOLT has a top and a door that are both opened by pulling a cord. Toriyama stated that the car took over a year to design, \"but due to my genius mini-model construction skills, I finally arrived at the end of what was a very emotional journey.\"\n\nHe worked on a 2006 one-shot called \"Cross Epoch\", in cooperation with \"One Piece\" creator Eiichiro Oda. The story is a short crossover that presents characters from both \"Dragon Ball\" and \"One Piece\". Toriyama was the character designer and artist for the 2006 Mistwalker Xbox 360 exclusive RPG \"Blue Dragon\", working with Hironobu Sakaguchi and Nobuo Uematsu, both of whom he had previously worked with on \"Chrono Trigger\". He announced that his help with the making of the \"Blue Dragon\" anime might very well be his final work in anime. In his own words, he said:\nIn 2008, he collaborated with Masakazu Katsura, his good friend and creator of \"I\"s\" and \"Zetman\", for the \"Jump SQ\" one-shot \"Sachie-chan Good!!\". It was published in North America in the free SJ Alpha Yearbook 2013, which was mailed out to annual subscribers of the digital manga magazine \"Shonen Jump Alpha\" in December 2012. The two worked together again in 2009, for the three-chapter one-shot \"Jiya\" in \"Weekly Young Jump\".\n\nAvex Trax commissioned Toriyama to draw a portrait of pop singer Ayumi Hamasaki; it was printed on the CD of her 2009 single \"Rule/Sparkle\", which was used as the theme song to the American live-action \"Dragonball Evolution\" film. Also in 2009, Toriyama drew a manga titled \"Delicious Island's Mr. U\" for Anjō's Rural Society Project, a nonprofit environmental organization that teaches the importance of agriculture and nature to young children. They originally asked him to do the illustrations for a pamphlet, but Toriyama liked the project and decided to expand it into a story. It is included in a booklet about environmental awareness that is distributed by the Anjō city government.\n\nHe collaborated with \"Shōnen Jump\" to create a video to raise awareness and support for those affected by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami on March 11, 2011. \"\", the series' first theatrical film in 17 years, opened on March 30, 2013 and marks the first time Toriyama has been deeply involved in an animation, in this case as early as the screenwriting stages. A special \"dual ticket\" that can be used to see both \"Battle of Gods\" and \"\" was created with new art by both Toriyama and Eiichiro Oda, creator of \"One Piece\".\n\nHis one-shot \"Kintoki\", originally published in 2010, was released in North America's online manga anthology \"Weekly Shonen Jump\" on January 28, 2013. On March 27, the \"Akira Toriyama: The World of \"Dragon Ball\"\" exhibit opened at the Takashimaya department store in Nihonbashi, garnering 72,000 visitors in its first nineteen days. The exhibit is separated into seven areas. The first provides a look at the series' history, the second shows the 400-plus characters from the series, the third displays Toriyama's manga manuscripts from memorable scenes, the fourth shows special color illustrations, the fifth displays rare \"Dragon Ball\"-related materials, the sixth includes design sketches and animation cels from the anime, and the seventh screens \"Dragon Ball\"-related videos. It was there until April 15, when it moved to Osaka from April 17 to 23, and ended in Toriyama's native Nagoya from July 27 to September 1. To celebrate the 45th anniversary of \"Weekly Shōnen Jump\", Toriyama launched a new series in its July 13 issue titled \"Jaco the Galactic Patrolman\". Viz Media began serializing it in English in their digital \"Weekly Shonen Jump\" magazine, beginning just two days later.\n\nThe follow-up film to \"Battle of Gods\", \"\" released on April 18, 2015, features even more contributions from Toriyama. He currently contributes to the \"Dragon Ball Super\" anime and manga since June 2015.\n\nToriyama married his wife on May 2, 1982. She is a former manga artist from Nagoya under the pen name , and occasionally helped Toriyama and his assistant on \"Dr. Slump\" when they were short on time. They have two children; a son named born on March 23, 1987, and a daughter born in October 1990. Toriyama lives in his home studio in Kiyosu.\n\nToriyama has a love of cars and motorcycles, something he inherited from his father who used to race motorbikes and operated an auto repair business for a brief time. Although he does not understand the mechanics himself. The author is an animal lover, having kept many different species of birds, dogs, cats, fish, lizards and bugs as pets since childhood. Some were used as models for characters he created such as Karin and Beerus. Toriyama has had a lifelong passion for plastic models, and has designed several for the Fine Molds brand. He also collected autographs of famous manga artists, having over 30 including Yudetamago and Hisashi Eguchi, a hobby he gave to Peasuke Soramame.\n\nToriyama admires Osamu Tezuka's \"Astro Boy\" and was impressed by Walt Disney's \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\", which he remembers for its high-quality animation. Jackie Chan's early movies also had a noticeable influence on his stories, particularly Chan's martial arts comedy film \"Drunken Master\". Toriyama stated he was influenced by animator Toyoo Ashida and the anime television series adaptation of his own \"Dragon Ball\"; from which he learned that separating colors instead of blending them makes the art cleaner and coloring illustrations easier. It was Toriyama's sound effects in \"Mysterious Rain Jack\" that caught the eye of Kazuhiko Torishima, who explained that usually they are written in \"katakana\", but Toriyama used the Roman alphabet which he found refreshing. In his opinion, Torishima stated that Toriyama excels in black and white, utilizing black areas, as a result of not having had the money to buy screentone when he started drawing manga.\n\n\"Dr. Slump\" is mainly a comedy series, filled with puns, toilet humor and sexual innuendos. But it also contained many science fiction elements; aliens, anthropomorphic characters, time travel, and parodies of works such as Godzilla, \"Star Wars\" and \"Star Trek\". Toriyama also included many real-life people in the series, such as his assistants, wife and colleagues (such as Masakazu Katsura), but most notably his editor Kazuhiko Torishima as the series' main antagonist, Dr. Mashirito.\n\nWhen \"Dragon Ball\" began, it was loosely based on the classic Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\", with Goku being Sun Wukong and Bulma as Xuanzang. Toriyama continued to use his characteristic comedic style in the beginning, but over the course of time this slowly changed, with him turning the series into a \"nearly-pure fighting manga\" later on. He did not plan out in advance what would happen in the series, instead choosing to draw as he went. This, coupled with him simply forgetting things he had already drawn, caused him to find himself in situations that he had to write himself out of. In a rare 2013 interview, commenting on \"Dragon Ball\"'s global success, Toriyama admitted, \"Frankly, I don't quite understand why it happened. While the manga was being serialized, the only thing I wanted as I kept drawing was to make Japanese boys happy.\" Speaking of his manga in general, he said, \"The role of my manga is to be a work of entertainment through and through. I dare say I don't care even if [my works] have left nothing behind, as long as they have entertained their readers.\"\n\nToriyama was commissioned to illustrate the characters and monsters for the first \"Dragon Quest\" video game (1986) in order to separate it from other role-playing games of the time. He has since worked on every title in the series. For each game Yuji Horii first sends rough sketches of the characters with their background information to Toriyama, who then re-draws them. Lastly, Horii approves the finished work. Toriyama explained in 1995 that for video games, because the sprites are so small, as long as they have a distinguishing feature so people can tell which character it is, he can make complex designs without concern of having to reproduce it like he usually would in manga. Besides the character and monster designs, Toriyama also does the games' packaging art and, for \"\", the boats and ships. The series' Slime character, which has become a sort of mascot for the franchise, is considered to be one of the most recognizable figures in gaming.\n\nManga critic Jason Thompson declared Toriyama's art influential, saying that his \"extremely personal and recognizable style\" was a reason for \"Dragon Ball\"'s popularity. He points out that the popular \"shōnen\" manga of the late 1980s and early 1990s had \"manly\" heroes, such as \"City Hunter\" and \"Fist of the North Star\", whereas \"Dragon Ball\" starred the cartoonish and small Goku, thus starting a trend that Thompson says continues to this day. Toriyama himself said he went against the normal convention that the strongest characters should be the largest in terms of physical size, designing many of the series' most powerful characters with small statures. Thompson concluded his analysis by saying that only Akira Toriyama drew like this at the time and that \"Dragon Ball\" is \"an action manga drawn by a gag manga artist.\" However, James S. Yadao, author of \"The Rough Guide to Manga\", points out that an art shift does occur in the series, as the characters gradually \"lose the rounded, innocent look that [Toriyama] established in \"Dr. Slump\" and gain sharper angles that leap off the page with their energy and intensity.\"\n\nThompson stated in 2011 that \"\"Dragon Ball\" is by far the most influential shonen manga of the last 30 years, and today, almost every \"Shōnen Jump\" artist lists it as one of their favorites and lifts from it in various ways.\" Many manga artists have named Toriyama and \"Dragon Ball\" as influences, including \"One Piece\" author Eiichiro Oda, \"Naruto\" creator Masashi Kishimoto, \"Fairy Tail\" and \"Rave\" author Hiro Mashima, \"Venus Versus Virus\" author Atsushi Suzumi, \"Bleach\" creator Tite Kubo, \"Black Cat\" author Kentaro Yabuki, and \"Mr. Fullswing\" author Shinya Suzuki. Ian Jones-Quartey, a producer of the American animated series \"Steven Universe\", is a fan of both \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Dr. Slump\", and uses Toriyama's vehicle designs as reference for his own. He also stated that \"We're all big Toriyama fans on [\"Steven Universe\"], which kind of shows a bit.\" In 2008, Oricon conducted a poll of people's favorite manga artists, with Toriyama coming in second, only behind \"Nana\" author Ai Yazawa. However, he was number one among male respondents and among those over 30 years of age. They held a poll on the Mangaka that Changed the History of Manga in 2010, \"mangaka\" being the Japanese word for a manga artist. Toriyama came in second, after only Osamu Tezuka, due to his works being highly influential and popular worldwide. Toriyama won the Special 40th Anniversary Festival Award at the 2013 Angoulême International Comics Festival, honoring his years in cartooning. He actually received the most votes for the festival's Grand Prix de la ville d'Angoulême award that year; however, the selection committee chose Willem as the recipient. Due to his video game design work, IGN named Toriyama number 74 on their list of the Top 100 Game Creators of All Time.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3093", "title": "Epsilon Ursae Majoris", "text": "Epsilon Ursae Majoris\n\nEpsilon Ursae Majoris (ε Ursae Majoris, abbreviated Epsilon UMa, ε UMa), also named Alioth, or the \"Ewelinka\", is (despite being designated 'epsilon') the brightest star in the constellation of Ursa Major, and at magnitude 1.76 is the thirty-first-brightest star in the sky.\n\nIt is the star in the tail of the bear closest to its body, and thus the star in the handle of the Big Dipper (Plough) closest to the bowl. It is also a member of the large and diffuse Ursa Major moving group. Historically, the star was frequently used in celestial navigation in the maritime trade, because it is listed as one of the 57 navigational stars.\n\nAccording to \"Hipparcos\", Alioth is from the Sun. Its spectral type is A1p; the \"p\" stands for \"peculiar\", as the spectrum of its light is characteristic of an Alpha2 Canum Venaticorum variable. Alioth, as a representative of this type, may harbor two interacting processes. First, the star's strong magnetic field separating different elements in the star's hydrogen 'fuel'. In addition, a rotation axis at an angle to the magnetic axis may be spinning different bands of magnetically sorted elements into the line of sight between Alioth and the Earth. The intervening elements react differently at different frequencies of light as they whip in and out of view, causing Alioth to have very strange spectral lines that fluctuate over a period of 5.1 days. The \"kB9\" suffix to the spectral type indicates that the calcium K line is present and representative of a B9 spectral type even though the rest of the spectrum indicates A1.\n\nWith Alioth, the rotational and magnetic axes are at almost 90 degrees to one another. Darker (denser) regions of chromium form a band at right angles to the equator.\n\nA recent study suggests Alioth's 5.1-day variation may be due to a substellar object of about 14.7 Jupiter masses in an eccentric orbit (e=0.5) with an average separation of 0.055 astronomical units.\n\nAlioth has a relatively weak magnetic field, 15 times weaker than α CVn, but it is still 100 times stronger than that of the Earth.\n\n\"ε Ursae Majoris\" (Latinised to \"Epsilon Ursae Majoris\") is the star's Bayer designation. \n\nThe traditional name \"Alioth\" comes from the Arabic \"alyat\" (fat tail of a sheep). In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Alioth\" for this star.\n\nThis star was known to the Hindus as \"Añgiras\", one of the Seven Rishis.\n\nIn Chinese, (), meaning \"Northern Dipper\", refers to an asterism consisting of Epsilon Ursae Majoris, Alpha Ursae Majoris, Beta Ursae Majoris, Gamma Ursae Majoris, Delta Ursae Majoris, Zeta Ursae Majoris and Eta Ursae Majoris. Consequently, Epsilon Ursae Majoris itself is known as (, ) and (, ).\n\nUSS Allioth (AK-109) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship named after the star.\n\n"}
{"id": "3095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3095", "title": "Amiga 500", "text": "Amiga 500\n\nThe Amiga 500, also known as the A500, is the first low-end Commodore Amiga 16/32-bit multimedia home/personal computer. It was announced at the winter Consumer Electronics Show in January 1987at the same time as the high-end Amiga 2000and competed directly against the Atari 520ST. Before Amiga 500 was shipped, Commodore suggested that the list price of the Amiga 500 was without a monitor. At delivery in October 1987, Commodore announced that the Amiga 500 would carry a list price. In Europe, the Amiga 500 was released in May 1987. In the Netherlands, the A500 was available from April 1987 for a list price of 1499 HFL (US$730 in 1987).\n\nThe Amiga 500 represents a return to Commodore's roots by being sold in the same mass retail outlets as the Commodore 64to which it was a spiritual successoras opposed to the computer-store-only Amiga 1000, as well as being another computer whose keyboard is included just above in the same case.\n\nThe original Amiga 500 proved to be Commodore’s best-selling Amiga model, enjoying particular success in Europe. Although popular with hobbyists, arguably its most widespread use was as a gaming machine, where its advanced graphics and sound were of significant benefit. Amiga 500 eventually sold 6 million units worldwide.\n\nIn October 1989, the Amiga 500 dropped its price from £499 to £399 and was bundled with the \"Batman Pack\" in the United Kingdom. This price drop helped Commodore to sell more than 1 million Amiga 500s in 1989.\n\nIn late 1991, an enhanced model known as the Amiga 500+ replaced the original 500 in some markets; it was bundled with the \"Cartoon Classics\" pack in the United Kingdom at £399.\n\nThe Amiga 500 series was discontinued in mid-1992 and replaced by the similarly specified and priced Amiga 600, although this new machine had originally been intended as a much cheaper model, which would have been the A300. In late 1992, Commodore released the “next-generation” Amiga 1200, a machine closer in concept to the original Amiga 500, but featuring significant technical improvements. Despite this, neither the A1200 nor the A600 replicated the commercial success of its predecessor, as by this time, the popular market was definitively shifting from the home computer platforms of the past to commodity Wintel PCs and the new \"low-cost\" Macintosh Classic, LC and IIsi models.\n\nCodenamed \"Rock Lobster\" during development and outwardly resembling the Commodore 128, the Amiga 500 houses the keyboard and CPU in one shell, unlike the Amiga 1000. It utilizes a Motorola 68000 microprocessor running at (NTSC) or (PAL). The CPU implements a 32-bit model, has 32-bit registers and 32-bit internal data bus, but it has a 16-bit main ALU, uses a 16-bit external data bus and 24-bit address bus, providing a maximum of 16 MB of address space.\n\nThe earliest Amiga 500 models use nearly the same Original Amiga chipset as the Amiga 1000. So graphics can be displayed in multiple resolutions and color depths, even on the same screen. Resolutions vary from 320×200 (up to 32 colors) to 640×200 (up to 16 colors) for NTSC (704×484 overscan) and 320×256 to 640×256 for PAL (704×576 overscan.) The system uses planar graphics, with up to five bitplanes (four in high resolution) allowing 2-, 4-, 8-, 16-, and 32-color screens, from a palette of 4096 colors. Two special graphics modes are also available: Extra HalfBrite, which uses a 6th bitplane as a mask to cut the brightness of any pixel in half (resulting in 32 arbitrary colors plus 32 more colors set at half the value of the first 32), and which allows all 4096 colors to be used on screen simultaneously. Later revisions of the chipset are PAL/NTSC switchable in software.\n\nThe sound chip produces four hardware-mixed channels, two to the left and two to the right, of 8-bit PCM at a sampling frequency of up to . Each hardware channel has its own independent volume level and sampling rate, and can be designated to another channel where it can modulate both volume and frequency using its own output. With DMA disabled it's possible to output with a sampling frequency up to . There's a common trick to output sound with 14-bit precision that can be combined to output 14-bit sound.\n\nThe stock system comes with AmigaOS version 1.2 or 1.3 and of chip RAM (150 ns access time), one built-in double-density standard floppy disk drive that is completely programmable and can read IBM PC disks, standard Amiga disks, and up to using custom-formatting drivers.\n\nDespite the lack of Amiga 2000-compatible internal expansion slots, there are many ports and expansion options. There are two DE9M Atari joystick ports for joysticks or mice, stereo audio (RCA connectors 1 V p-p). There is a floppy drive port for daisy-chaining up to three extra floppy disk drives via an DB23F connector. The then-standard RS-232 serial port (DB25M) and Centronics parallel port (DB25F) are also included. The power supply is (, ). \nThe system displays video in analog RGB PAL or NTSC through a proprietary DB23M connector and in NTSC mode the line frequency is HSync for standard video modes, which is compatible with NTSC television and CVBS/RGB video, but out of range for most VGA-compatible monitors, while a multisync monitor is required for some of the higher resolutions. This connection can also be genlocked to an external video signal. The system was bundled with an RF adapter to provide output on televisions with a coaxial RF input, while monochrome composite video is available via an RCA connector (also coaxial). There is also a Zorro II bus expansion on the left side (behind a plastic cover). Peripherals such as a hard disk drive can be added via the expansion slot and are configured automatically by the Amiga's AutoConfig standard, so that multiple devices do not conflict with each other. Up to of “fast RAM\" can be added using the side expansion slot.\n\nThe Amiga 500 has a \"trap-door\" slot on the underside for an upgrade of of RAM. This extra RAM is classified as \"fast\" RAM, but is sometimes referred to as \"slow\" RAM: due to the design of the expansion bus, it is actually on the chipset bus. Such upgrades usually include a battery-backed real-time clock. All versions of the A500 can have the additional RAM configured as chip RAM by a simple hardware modification, which involves fitting a later model (8372A) Agnus chip. Likewise, all versions of the A500 can be upgraded to chip RAM by fitting the chip and adding additional memory.\n\nThe Amiga 500 also sports an unusual feature for a budget machine, socketed chips, which allow easy replacement of defective chips. The CPU can be directly upgraded on the motherboard to a 68010; or to a 68020, 68030, or 68040 via the side expansion slot; or by removing the CPU and plugging a CPU expansion card into the CPU socket (though this will require opening the computer and voiding any remaining warranty). In fact, all the custom chips can be upgraded to the Amiga Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) versions.\n\nThe case is made from ABS plastics which may become brown with time. This may be reversed by using the public-domain chemical mix \"Retr0bright\", though without a clearcoat to block oxygen, the brown colouring will return.\n\nWhenever the computer is powered on a self-diagnostic test is run that will show any failure with a specific colour where medium green means no chip RAM found or is damaged, red means bad kickstart-ROM, yellow means the CPU has crashed (no trap routine or trying to run bad code) or a bad Zorro expansion card.\nStopping on means that the CIA might be defective. mean there is a ROM or CIA problem, while\nThe keyboard LED uses blink codes: one blink means the keyboard ROM has a checksum error, two blinks means RAM failure, three blinks means watchdog timer failure. Using Caps Lock key and getting a response means CIA and the CPU works. There is no guarantee that every blinking state or color is accurate. Remember when the diagnostic codes are triggered it means the computer has some kind of fault and it can easily mis-interpret the fault and give false readings. For example, if the screen flashes green it can mean the Agnus is bad, the Agnus socket is bad, the logic connected to the Agnus is bad, the logic connected to the CPU is bad, the logic connected to the RAM is bad, a connection between CPU and/or logic and/or Agnus and/or Chip RAM is bad and/or some/all of the chip RAM is faulty etc. etc. Many of the issues with Amigas are caused by damage from corrosion or poor repair skills, especially the A500+ which has a Ni-Cad battery fitted and is always corroded if the battery has not been removed. Likewise a corroded battery on an A501 can cause faults on the A500 motherboard if the corrosion is very bad and has spread to the motherboard. The self-test chip RAM check is very brief and simplistic and all the other tests are minimalistic to minimize the start-up time (as documented in the Amiga Hardware Manual and many other official Commodore technical documents) so there is no guarantee that any of the diagnostic colours are 100% accurate.\n\n\nMax 6 bpp. The Amiga could show multiple resolution modes at the same time, splitting the screen vertically. An additional mode called Hold-And-Modify (HAM) makes it possible to utilize over a wide span. This works by letting each pixel position use the previous RGB value and modify one of the red, green or blue values to a new 4-bit value. This will cause some negligible colour artifacts however.\n\n\n\nA popular expansion for the Amiga 500 was the Amiga 501 circuit board that can be installed underneath the computer behind a plastic cover. It contains RAM configured by default as \"Slow RAM\" or \"trap-door RAM\" and a battery-backed real-time clock (RTC). However, the RAM is pseudo-fast RAM, only accessible by the processor, but still as slow as chip RAM. The motherboard can be modified to relocate the trap-door RAM to the chip memory pool, provided a compatible Agnus chip is fitted on the motherboard.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3100", "title": "Aga", "text": "Aga\n\nAga or AGA may refer to:\n\nIn general, \"Aga\" has historically been used in the Middle East as a term of respect for dignitaries or wealthy people.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3104", "title": "Amiga 1000", "text": "Amiga 1000\n\nThe Commodore Amiga 1000, also known as the A1000 and originally simply as the Amiga, is the first personal computer released by Commodore International in the Amiga line. It combines the 16/32-bit Motorola 68000 CPU which was powerful by 1985 standards with one of the most advanced graphics and sound systems in its class, and runs a preemptive multitasking operating system that fits into of read-only memory and shipped with 256 KB of RAM. The primary memory can be expanded internally with a manufacturer supplied 256 KB module for a total of 512 KB of RAM. Using the external slot the primary memory can be expanded up to \n\nThe A1000 has a number of characteristics that distinguish it from later Amiga models: It is the only model to feature the short-lived Amiga check-mark logo on its case, the majority of the case is elevated slightly to give a storage area for the keyboard when not in use (a \"keyboard garage\"), and the inside of the case is engraved with the signatures of the Amiga designers (similar to the Macintosh); including Jay Miner and the paw print of his dog Mitchy. The A1000's case was designed by Howard Stolz. As Senior Industrial Designer at Commodore, Stolz was the mechanical lead and primary interface with Sanyo in Japan, the contract manufacturer for the A1000 casing.\n\nThe Amiga 1000 was manufactured in two variations: One uses the NTSC television standard and the other uses the PAL television standard. The NTSC variant was the initial model manufactured and sold in North America. The later PAL model was manufactured in Germany and sold in countries using the PAL television standard. The first NTSC systems lacks the EHB video mode which is present in all later Amiga models.\n\nBecause AmigaOS was rather buggy at the time of the A1000's release, the OS was not placed in ROM then. Instead, the A1000 includes a daughterboard with 256 KB of RAM, dubbed the \"writable control store\" (WCS), into which the core of the operating system is loaded from floppy disk (this portion of the operating system is known as the \"Kickstart\"). The WCS is write-protected after loading, and system resets do not require a reload of the WCS. In Europe, the WCS was often referred to as WOM (Write Once Memory), a play on the more conventional term \"ROM\" (read-only memory).\n\nThe preproduction Amiga (which was codenamed \"Velvet\") released to developers in early 1985 contained of RAM with an option to expand it to Commodore later increased the system memory to due to objections by the Amiga development team. The names of the custom chips were different; Denise and Paula were called Daphne and Portia respectively. The casing of the preproduction Amiga was almost identical to the production version: the main difference being an embossed Commodore logo in the top left corner. It did not have the developer signatures or the carry handle.\n\nThe Amiga 1000 has a Motorola 68000 CPU running at 7.15909 MHz (on NTSC systems) or 7.09379 MHz (PAL systems), precisely double the video color carrier frequency for NTSC or 1.6 times the color carrier frequency for PAL. The system clock timings are derived from the video frequency, which simplifies glue logic and allows the Amiga 1000 to make do with a single crystal. In keeping with its video game heritage, the chipset was designed to synchronize CPU memory access and chipset DMA so the hardware runs in real time without wait-state delays.\n\nThough most units were sold with an analog RGB monitor, the A1000 also has a built-in composite video output which allows the computer to be connected directly to some monitors other than their standard RGB monitor. The A1000 also has a \"TV MOD\" output, into which an RF Modulator can be plugged, allowing connection to a TV that was old enough not to even have a composite video input.\n\nThe original 68000 CPU can be directly replaced with a Motorola 68010, which can execute instructions slightly faster than the 68000 but also introduces a small degree of software incompatibility. Third-party CPU upgrades, which mostly fit in the CPU socket, use faster successors 68020/68881 or 68030/68882 microprocessors and integrated memory. Such upgrades often have the option to revert to 68000 mode for full compatibility. Some boards have a socket to seat the original 68000, whereas the 68030 cards typically come with an on-board 68000.\n\nThe original Amiga&nbps;1000 is the only model to have 256 KB of Amiga Chip RAM, which can be expanded to 512 KB with the addition of a daughterboard under a cover in the center front of the machine. RAM may also be upgraded via official and third-party upgrades, with a practical upper limit of about 9 MB of \"fast RAM\" due to the 68000's 24-bit address bus. This memory is accessible only by the CPU permitting faster code execution as DMA cycles are not shared with the chipset.\n\nThe Amiga 1000 features an 86-pin expansion port (electrically identical to the later Amiga 500 expansion port, though the A500's connector is inverted). This port is used by third-party expansions such as memory upgrades and SCSI adapters. These resources are handled by the Amiga Autoconfig standard. Other expansion options are available including a bus expander which provides two Zorro-II slots.\n\nIntroduced on July 23, 1985 during a star-studded gala featuring Andy Warhol and Debbie Harry held at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center in New York City, machines began shipping in September with a base configuration of 256 KB of RAM at the retail price of . A analog RGB monitor was available for around , bringing the price of a complete Amiga system to 1,595 USD. Before the release of the Amiga 500 and Amiga 2000 models in 1987, the A1000 was simply called \"Amiga\".\n\nIn the US, the A1000 was marketed as \"The Amiga from Commodore\", with the Commodore logo omitted from the case. The Commodore branding was retained for the international versions. \n\nAdditionally, the Amiga 1000 was sold exclusively in computer stores in the US rather than the various non computer-dedicated department and toy stores through which the VIC-20 and Commodore 64 were retailed. These measures were an effort to avoid Commodore's \"toy-store\" computer image created during the Tramiel era. \n\nAlong with the operating system, the machine came bundled with a version of AmigaBASIC developed by Microsoft and a speech synthesis library developed by Softvoice, Inc.\n\nMany A1000 owners remained attached to their machines long after newer models rendered the units technically obsolete, and it attracted numerous aftermarket upgrades. Many CPU upgrades that plugged into the Motorola 68000 socket functioned in the A1000. Additionally, a line of products called the \"Rejuvenator\" series allowed the use of newer chipsets in the A1000, and an Australian-designed replacement A1000 motherboard called \"The Phoenix\" utilized the same chipset as the A3000 and added an A2000-compatible video slot and on-board SCSI controller.\n\nIn 1994, as Commodore filed for bankruptcy, \"Byte\" magazine called the Amiga 1000 \"the first multimedia computer... so far ahead of its time that almost nobody—including Commodore's marketing department—could fully articulate what it was all about\".\n\nIn 2006, PC World rated the Amiga 1000 as the 7th greatest PC of all time. In 2007, it was rated by the same magazine as the 37th best tech product of all time.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3107", "title": "Asymptote", "text": "Asymptote\n\nIn analytic geometry, an asymptote () of a curve is a line such that the distance between the curve and the line approaches zero as they tend to infinity. Some sources include the requirement that the curve may not cross the line infinitely often, but this is unusual for modern authors. In some contexts, such as algebraic geometry, an asymptote is defined as a line which is tangent to a curve at infinity.\n\nThe word asymptote is derived from the Greek ἀσύμπτωτος (\"asumptōtos\") which means \"not falling together\", from ἀ priv. + σύν \"together\" + πτωτ-ός \"fallen\". The term was introduced by Apollonius of Perga in his work on conic sections, but in contrast to its modern meaning, he used it to mean any line that does not intersect the given curve.\n\nThere are potentially three kinds of asymptotes: \"horizontal\", \"vertical\" and \"oblique\" asymptotes. For curves given by the graph of a function , horizontal asymptotes are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as \"x\" tends to Vertical asymptotes are vertical lines near which the function grows without bound.\n\nMore generally, one curve is a \"curvilinear asymptote\" of another (as opposed to a \"linear asymptote\") if the distance between the two curves tends to zero as they tend to infinity, although the term \"asymptote\" by itself is usually reserved for linear asymptotes.\n\nAsymptotes convey information about the behavior of curves \"in the large\", and determining the asymptotes of a function is an important step in sketching its graph. The study of asymptotes of functions, construed in a broad sense, forms a part of the subject of asymptotic analysis.\n\nThe idea that a curve may come arbitrarily close to a line without actually becoming the same may seem to counter everyday experience. The representations of a line and a curve as marks on a piece of paper or as pixels on a computer screen have a positive width. So if they were to be extended far enough they would seem to merge, at least as far as the eye could discern. But these are physical representations of the corresponding mathematical entities; the line and the curve are idealized concepts whose width is 0 (see Line). Therefore, the understanding of the idea of an asymptote requires an effort of reason rather than experience.\n\nConsider the graph of the function formula_1 shown to the right. The coordinates of the points on the curve are of the form formula_2 where x is a number other than 0. For example, the graph contains the points (1, 1), (2, 0.5), (5, 0.2), (10, 0.1), … As the values of formula_3 become larger and larger, say 100, 1000, 10,000 …, putting them far to the right of the illustration, the corresponding values of formula_4, .01, .001, .0001, …, become infinitesimal relative to the scale shown. But no matter how large formula_3 becomes, its reciprocal formula_6 is never 0, so the curve never actually touches the \"x\"-axis. Similarly, as the values of formula_3 become smaller and smaller, say .01, .001, .0001, …, making them infinitesimal relative to the scale shown, the corresponding values of formula_4, 100, 1000, 10,000 …, become larger and larger. So the curve extends farther and farther upward as it comes closer and closer to the \"y\"-axis. Thus, both the \"x\" and \"y\"-axes are asymptotes of the curve. These ideas are part of the basis of concept of a limit in mathematics, and this connection is explained more fully below.\n\nThe asymptotes most commonly encountered in the study of calculus are of curves of the form . These can be computed using limits and classified into \"horizontal\", \"vertical\" and \"oblique\" asymptotes depending on its orientation. Horizontal asymptotes are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as \"x\" tends to +∞ or −∞. As the name indicate they are parallel to the \"x\"-axis. Vertical asymptotes are vertical lines (perpendicular to the \"x\"-axis) near which the function grows without bound. Oblique asymptotes are diagonal lines so that the difference between the curve and the line approaches 0 as \"x\" tends to +∞ or −∞. More general type of asymptotes can be defined in this case. Only open curves that have some infinite branch, can have an asymptote. No closed curve can have an asymptote.\n\nThe line \"x\" = \"a\" is a \"vertical asymptote\" of the graph of the function if at least one of the following statements is true:\n\nThe function \"ƒ\"(\"x\") may or may not be defined at \"a\", and its precise value at the point \"x\" = \"a\" does not affect the asymptote. For example, for the function\n\nhas a limit of +∞ as , \"ƒ\"(\"x\") has the vertical asymptote , even though \"ƒ\"(0) = 5. The graph of this function does intersect the vertical asymptote once, at (0,5). It is impossible for the graph of a function to intersect a vertical asymptote (or a vertical line in general) in more than one point. Moreover, if a function is continuous at each point where it is defined, it is impossible that its graph does intersect any vertical asymptote.\n\nA common example of a vertical asymptote is the case of a rational function at a point x such that the denominator is zero and the numerator is non-zero.\n\n\"Horizontal asymptotes\" are horizontal lines that the graph of the function approaches as . The horizontal line \"y\" = \"c\" is a horizontal asymptote of the function \"y\" = \"ƒ\"(\"x\") if\nIn the first case, \"ƒ\"(\"x\") has \"y\" = \"c\" as asymptote when \"x\" tends to −∞, and in the second that \"ƒ\"(\"x\") has \"y\" = \"c\" as an asymptote as \"x\" tends to +∞\n\nFor example, the arctangent function satisfies\n\nSo the line is a horizontal tangent for the arctangent when \"x\" tends to −∞, and is a horizontal tangent for the arctangent when \"x\" tends to +∞.\n\nFunctions may lack horizontal asymptotes on either or both sides, or may have one horizontal asymptote that is the same in both directions. For example, the function has a horizontal asymptote at \"y\" = 0 when \"x\" tends both to −∞ and +∞ because, respectively,\n\nWhen a linear asymptote is not parallel to the \"x\"- and \"y\"-axis, it is called an \"oblique asymptote\" or \"slant asymptote\". A function \"f\"(\"x\") is asymptotic to the straight line (\"m\" ≠ 0) if\n\nformula_17\n\nIn the first case the line is an oblique asymptote of \"ƒ\"(\"x\") when \"x\" tends to +∞, and in the second case the line is an oblique asymptote of \"ƒ(x)\" when \"x\" tends to −∞\n\nAn example is ƒ(\"x\") = \"x\" + 1/\"x\", which has the oblique asymptote \"y\" = \"x\" (that is \"m\" = 1, \"n\" = 0) as seen in the limits\n\nThe asymptotes of many elementary functions can be found without the explicit use of limits (although the derivations of such methods typically use limits).\n\nThe oblique asymptote, for the function \"f\"(\"x\"), will be given by the equation \"y\"=\"mx\"+\"n\". The value for \"m\" is computed first and is given by\n\nwhere \"a\" is either formula_22 or formula_23 depending on the case being studied. It is good practice to treat the two cases separately. If this limit doesn't exist then there is no oblique asymptote in that direction.\n\nHaving \"m\" then the value for \"n\" can be computed by\n\nwhere \"a\" should be the same value used before. If this limit fails to exist then there is no oblique asymptote in that direction, even should the limit defining \"m\" exist. Otherwise is the oblique asymptote of \"ƒ\"(\"x\") as \"x\" tends to \"a\".\n\nFor example, the function has\n\nso that is the asymptote of \"ƒ\"(\"x\") when \"x\" tends to +∞.\n\nThe function has\n\nSo does not have an asymptote when \"x\" tends to +∞.\n\nA rational function has at most one horizontal asymptote or oblique (slant) asymptote, and possibly many vertical asymptotes.\n\nThe degree of the numerator and degree of the denominator determine whether or not there are any horizontal or oblique asymptotes. The cases are tabulated below, where deg(numerator) is the degree of the numerator, and deg(denominator) is the degree of the denominator.\n\nThe vertical asymptotes occur only when the denominator is zero (If both the numerator and denominator are zero, the multiplicities of the zero are compared). For example, the following function has vertical asymptotes at \"x\" = 0, and \"x\" = 1, but not at \"x\" = 2.\n\nWhen the numerator of a rational function has degree exactly one greater than the denominator, the function has an oblique (slant) asymptote. The asymptote is the polynomial term after dividing the numerator and denominator. This phenomenon occurs because when dividing the fraction, there will be a linear term, and a remainder. For example, consider the function\nshown to the right. As the value of \"x\" increases, \"f\" approaches the asymptote \"y\" = \"x\". This is because the other term, \"y\" = 1/(\"x\"+1) becomes smaller.\n\nIf the degree of the numerator is more than 1 larger than the degree of the denominator, and the denominator does not divide the numerator, there will be a nonzero remainder that goes to zero as \"x\" increases, but the quotient will not be linear, and the function does not have an oblique asymptote.\n\nIf a known function has an asymptote (such as \"y\"=0 for \"f\"(x)=\"e\"), then the translations of it also have an asymptote.\n\nIf a known function has an asymptote, then the scaling of the function also have an asymptote.\n\nFor example, \"f\"(\"x\")=\"e\"+2 has horizontal asymptote \"y\"=0+2=2, and no vertical or oblique asymptotes.\n\nLet be a parametric plane curve, in coordinates \"A\"(\"t\") = (\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")). Suppose that the curve tends to infinity, that is:\nA line ℓ is an asymptote of \"A\" if the distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\") to ℓ tends to zero as \"t\" → \"b\".\n\nFor example, the upper right branch of the curve \"y\" = 1/\"x\" can be defined parametrically as \"x\" = \"t\", \"y\" = 1/\"t\" (where \"t\">0). First, \"x\" → ∞ as \"t\" → ∞ and the distance from the curve to the \"x\"-axis is 1/\"t\" which approaches 0 as \"t\" → ∞. Therefore, the \"x\"-axis is an asymptote of the curve. Also, \"y\" → ∞ as \"t\" → 0 from the right, and the distance between the curve and the \"y\"-axis is \"t\" which approaches 0 as \"t\" → 0. So the \"y\"-axis is also an asymptote. A similar argument shows that the lower left branch of the curve also has the same two lines as asymptotes.\n\nAlthough the definition here uses a parameterization of the curve, the notion of asymptote does not depend on the parameterization. In fact, if the equation of the line is formula_32 then the distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\") = (\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")) to the line is given by\nif γ(\"t\") is a change of parameterization then the distance becomes\nwhich tends to zero simultaneously as the previous expression.\n\nAn important case is when the curve is the graph of a real function (a function of one real variable and returning real values). The graph of the function \"y\" = \"ƒ\"(\"x\") is the set of points of the plane with coordinates (\"x\",\"ƒ\"(\"x\")). For this, a parameterization is\nThis parameterization is to be considered over the open intervals (\"a\",\"b\"), where \"a\" can be −∞ and \"b\" can be +∞.\n\nAn asymptote can be either vertical or non-vertical (oblique or horizontal). In the first case its equation is \"x\" = \"c\", for some real number \"c\". The non-vertical case has equation , where \"m\" and formula_36 are real numbers. All three types of asymptotes can be present at the same time in specific examples. Unlike asymptotes for curves that are graphs of functions, a general curve may have more than two non-vertical asymptotes, and may cross its vertical asymptotes more than once.\n\nLet be a parametric plane curve, in coordinates \"A\"(\"t\") = (\"x\"(\"t\"),\"y\"(\"t\")), and \"B\" be another (unparameterized) curve. Suppose, as before, that the curve \"A\" tends to infinity. The curve \"B\" is a curvilinear asymptote of \"A\" if the shortest of the distance from the point \"A\"(\"t\") to a point on \"B\" tends to zero as \"t\" → \"b\". Sometimes \"B\" is simply referred to as an asymptote of \"A\", when there is no risk of confusion with linear asymptotes.\n\nFor example, the function\nhas a curvilinear asymptote , which is known as a \"parabolic asymptote\" because it is a parabola rather than a straight line.\n\nAsymptotes are used in procedures of curve sketching. An asymptote serves as a guide line to show the behavior of the curve towards infinity. In order to get better approximations of the curve, curvilinear asymptotes have also been used although the term asymptotic curve seems to be preferred.\n\nThe asymptotes of an algebraic curve in the affine plane are the lines that are tangent to the projectivized curve through a point at infinity. For example, one may identify the asymptotes to the unit hyperbola in this manner. Asymptotes are often considered only for real curves, although they also make sense when defined in this way for curves over an arbitrary field.\n\nA plane curve of degree \"n\" intersects its asymptote at most at \"n\"−2 other points, by Bézout's theorem, as the intersection at infinity is of multiplicity at least two. For a conic, there are a pair of lines that do not intersect the conic at any complex point: these are the two asymptotes of the conic.\n\nA plane algebraic curve is defined by an equation of the form \"P\"(\"x\",\"y\") = 0 where \"P\" is a polynomial of degree \"n\"\nwhere \"P\" is homogeneous of degree \"k\". Vanishing of the linear factors of the highest degree term \"P\" defines the asymptotes of the curve: setting , if , then the line\nis an asymptote if formula_40 and formula_41 are not both zero. If formula_42 and formula_43, there is no asymptote, but the curve has a branch that looks like a branch of parabola. Such a branch is called a , even when it does not have any parabola that is a curvilinear asymptote. If formula_44 the curve has a singular point at infinity which may have several asymptotes or parabolic branches.\n\nOver the complex numbers, \"P\" splits into linear factors, each of which defines an asymptote (or several for multiple factors). 0ver the reals, \"P\" splits in factors that are linear or quadratic factors. Only the linear factors correspond to infinite (real) branches of the curve, but if a linear factor has multiplicity greater than one, the curve may have several asymptotes or parabolic branches. It may also occur that such a multiple linear factor corresponds to two complex conjugate branches, and does not corresponds to any infinite branch of the real curve. For example, the curve has no real points outside the square formula_45, but its highest order term gives the linear factor \"x\" with multiplicity 4, leading to the unique asymptote \"x\"=0.\n\nThe hyperbola\nhas the two asymptotes\nThe equation for the union of these two lines is\nSimilarly, the hyperboloid\nis said to have the asymptotic cone\n\nThe distance between the hyperboloid and cone approaches 0 as the distance from the origin approaches infinity.\nMore generally, let us consider a surface that has an implicit equation\nformula_51\nwhere the formula_52 are homogeneous polynomials of degree formula_53 and formula_54. Then the equation formula_55 defines a cone which is centered at the origin. It is called an asymptotic cone, because the distance to the cone of a point of the surface tends to zero when the point on the surface tends to infinity.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3110", "title": "Andrew S. Tanenbaum", "text": "Andrew S. Tanenbaum\n\nAndrew Stuart Tanenbaum (sometimes referred to by the handle ast) (born March 16, 1944) is an American-Dutch computer scientist and professor emeritus of computer science at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam in the Netherlands.\n\nHe is best known as the author of MINIX, a free Unix-like operating system for teaching purposes, and for his computer science textbooks, regarded as standard texts in the field. He regards his teaching job as his most important work. Since 2004 he has operated Electoral-vote.com, a website dedicated to analysis of polling data in federal elections in the United States.\n\nTanenbaum, was born in New York City and grew up in suburban White Plains, New York. He is Jewish. His paternal grandfather was born in Khorostkiv in the Austro-Hungarian empire.\n\nHe received his bachelor of Science degree in Physics from MIT in 1965 and his Ph.D. degree in astrophysics from the University of California, Berkeley in 1971. Tanenbaum also served as a lobbyist for the Sierra Club.\n\nHe moved to the Netherlands to live with his wife, who is Dutch, but he retains his United States citizenship. He teaches courses about Computer Organization and Operating Systems and supervises the work of Ph.D. candidates at the VU University Amsterdam. On , he announced his retirement.\n\nTanenbaum is well recognized for his textbooks on computer science. They include:\n\nHis book, \"Operating Systems: Design and Implementation\" and MINIX were Linus Torvalds' inspiration for the Linux kernel. In his autobiography \"Just for Fun\", Torvalds describes it as \"the book that launched me to new heights\".\n\nHis books have been translated into many languages including Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Chinese, Dutch, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Macedonian, Mexican Spanish, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, and Spanish. They have appeared in over 175 editions and are used at universities around the world.\n\nTanenbaum has had a number of Ph.D. students who themselves have gone on to become widely known computer science researchers.\nThese include:\n\nIn the early 1990s, the Dutch government began setting up a number of thematically oriented research schools that spanned multiple universities. These schools were intended to bring professors and Ph.D. students from different Dutch (and later, foreign) universities together to help them cooperate and enhance their research.\n\nTanenbaum was one of the cofounders and first Dean of the Advanced School for Computing and Imaging (ASCI). This school initially consisted of nearly 200 faculty members and Ph.D. students from the Vrije Universiteit, University of Amsterdam, Delft University of Technology, and Leiden University. They were especially working on problems in advanced computer systems such as parallel computing and image analysis and processing.\n\nTanenbaum remained dean for 12 years, until 2005, when he was awarded an Academy Professorship by the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, at which time he became a full-time research professor. ASCI has since grown to include researchers from nearly a dozen universities in The Netherlands, Belgium, and France. ASCI offers Ph.D. level courses, has an annual conference, and runs various workshops every year.\n\nThe Amsterdam Compiler Kit is a toolkit for producing portable compilers. It was started sometime before 1981 and Andrew Tanenbaum was the architect from the start until version 5.5.\n\nIn 1987, Tanenbaum wrote a clone of UNIX, called MINIX (MINi-unIX), for the IBM PC. It was targeted at students and others who wanted to learn how an operating system worked. Consequently, he wrote a book that listed the source code in an appendix and described it in detail in the text. The source code itself was available on a set of floppy disks. Within three months, a Usenet newsgroup, comp.os.minix, had sprung up with over 40,000 subscribers discussing and improving the system. One of these subscribers was a Finnish student named Linus Torvalds who began adding new features to MINIX and tailoring it to his own needs. On October 5, 1991, Torvalds announced his own (POSIX like) kernel, called Linux, which originally used the MINIX file system, but it is not based on MINIX code.\n\nAlthough MINIX and Linux have diverged, MINIX continues to be developed, now as a production system as well as an educational one. The focus is on building a highly modular, reliable, and secure, operating system. The system is based on a microkernel, with only 5000 lines of code running in kernel mode. The rest of the operating system runs as a number of independent processes in user mode, including processes for the file system, process manager, and each device driver. The system continuously monitors each of these processes, and when a failure is detected is often capable of automatically replacing the failed process without a reboot, without disturbing running programs, and without the user even noticing. MINIX 3, as the current version is called, is available under the BSD license for free.\n\nTanenbaum has also been involved in numerous other research projects in the areas of operating systems, distributed systems, and ubiquitous computing, often as supervisor of Ph.D. students or a postdoctoral researcher. These projects include:\n\nIn 2004, Tanenbaum created Electoral-vote.com, a web site analyzing opinion polls for the 2004 U.S. Presidential Election, using them to project the outcome in the Electoral College. He stated that he created the site as an American who \"knows first hand what the world thinks of America and it is not a pretty picture at the moment. I want people to think of America as the land of freedom and democracy, not the land of arrogance and blind revenge. I want to be proud of America again.\" The site provided a color-coded map, updated each day with projections for each state's electoral votes. Through most of the campaign period Tanenbaum kept his identity secret, referring to himself as \"the Votemaster\" and acknowledging only that he personally preferred John Kerry. A libertarian who supports the Democrats, he revealed his identity on November 1, 2004, the day before the election, also stating his reasons and qualifications for running the website.\n\nThrough the site he also covered the 2006 midterm elections, correctly predicting the winner of all 33 Senate races that year.\n\nFor the 2008 elections, he got every state right except for Indiana, which he said McCain would win by 2% (Obama won by 1%) and Missouri, which he said was too close to call (McCain won by 0.1%). He correctly predicted all the winners in the Senate except for Minnesota, where he predicted a 1% win by Norm Coleman over Al Franken. After 7 months of legal battling and recounts, Franken won by 312 votes (0.01%).\n\nIn 2010, he correctly projected 35 out of 37 Senate races in the Midterm elections on the website. The exceptions were Colorado and Nevada.\n\nThe Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate was a famous debate between Tanenbaum and Linus Torvalds regarding kernel design on Usenet in 1992.\n\n\n\nTanenbaum has been keynote speaker at numerous conferences, most recently\n\n"}
{"id": "3111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3111", "title": "Ariane 5", "text": "Ariane 5\n\nAriane 5 is a European heavy-lift launch vehicle that is part of the Ariane rocket family, an expendable launch system used to deliver payloads into geostationary transfer orbit (GTO) or low Earth orbit (LEO).\n\nAriane 5 rockets are manufactured under the authority of the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. Airbus Defence and Space is the prime contractor for the vehicles, leading a consortium of other European contractors.\n\nAriane 5 is operated and marketed by Arianespace as part of the \"Ariane\" programme. The rockets are launched by Arianespace from the Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana.\n\nAriane 5 succeeded Ariane 4, but was not derived from it directly. Ariane 5 has been refined since the first launch in successive versions, \"G\", \"G+\", \"GS\", \"ECA\", and most recently, \"ES\". ESA originally designed Ariane 5 to launch the Hermes spaceplane, and thus intended it to be human rated from the beginning.\n\nTwo satellites can be mounted using a SYLDA carrier (\"SYstème de Lancement Double Ariane\"). Three main satellites are possible depending on size using SPELTRA (\"Structure Porteuse Externe Lancement TRiple Ariane\"). Up to eight secondary payloads, usually small experiment packages or minisatellites, can be carried with an ASAP (\"Ariane Structure for Auxiliary Payloads\") platform.\n\nOn 28 June 2017, Ariane 5 performed its 80th consecutive successful mission since 2003.\n\nAriane 5’s cryogenic H173 main stage (H158 for Ariane 5 G, G+, and GS) is called the EPC (\"Étage Principal Cryotechnique\"—Cryotechnic Main Stage). It consists of a large tank 30.5 metres high with two compartments, one for liquid oxygen and one for liquid hydrogen, and a Vulcain 2 engine at the base with a vacuum thrust of . The H173 EPC weighs about 189 tonnes, including 175 tonnes of propellant. After the main cryogenic stage runs out of fuel, it can re-enter the atmosphere for an ocean splashdown.\n\nAttached to the sides are two P241 (P238 for Ariane 5 G and G+) solid rocket boosters (SRBs or EAPs from the French \"Étages d’Accélération à Poudre\"), each weighing about 277 tonnes full and delivering a thrust of about . They are fueled by a mix of ammonium perchlorate (68%) and aluminum fuel (18%) and HTPB (14%). They each burn for 130 seconds before being dropped into the ocean. The SRBs are usually allowed to sink to the bottom of the ocean, but like the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Boosters they can be recovered with parachutes, and this has occasionally been done for post-flight analysis. (Unlike Space Shuttle SRBs Ariane 5 boosters are not reused.) The most recent attempt was for the first Ariane 5 ECA mission. One of the two boosters was successfully recovered and returned to the Guiana Space Center for analysis. Prior to that mission, the last such recovery and testing was done in 2003.\n\nThe French M51 SLBM shares a substantial amount of technology with these boosters.\n\nIn February 2000 the suspected nose cone of an Ariane 5 booster washed ashore on the South Texas coast, and was recovered by beachcombers before the government could get to it.\n\nThe second stage is on top of the main stage and below the payload. The Ariane 5 G used the EPS (\"Étage à Propergols Stockables\"—Storable Propellant Stage), which is fueled by monomethylhydrazine (MMH) and nitrogen tetroxide. It also has 10 tonnes of storable propellants. The EPS was improved for use on the Ariane 5 G+, GS, and ES. Ariane 5 ECA uses the ESC (\"Étage Supérieur Cryotechnique\"—Cryogenic Upper Stage), which is fueled by liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen.\n\nThe EPS upper stage is capable of multiple ignitions, first demonstrated during flight V26 which was launched on 5 October 2007. This was purely to test the engine, and occurred after the payloads had been deployed. The first operational use of restart capability as part of a mission came on 9 March 2008, when two burns were made to deploy the first Automated Transfer Vehicle into a circular parking orbit, followed by a third burn after ATV deployment to de-orbit the stage. This procedure was repeated for all subsequent ATV flights.\n\nThe payload and all upper stages are covered at launch by a fairing, which is jettisoned once sufficient altitude has been reached (typically above 100 km). The Fairing is also used for aerodynamic stability and protection from heating during supersonic flight and acoustic loads.\n\n, the Ariane 5 commercial launch price for launching a \"midsize satellite in the lower position\" is approximately , competing for commercial launches in an increasingly competitive market, mainly due to SpaceX.\n\nThe heavier satellite launched in the upper position on a typical dual-satellite Ariane 5 launch is priced higher, on the order of .\n\nTotal launch price of an Ariane 5—which can transport up to two satellites to space, one in the \"upper\" and one in the \"lower\" positions—is around 150 million Euro as of January 2015.\n\nThe Ariane 5 ME (Mid-life Evolution) was in development until 2015 and seen as a stopgap between / and the new Ariane 6. With first flight planned for 2018, it would have become ESA's principal launcher until the arrival of the new Ariane 6 version.\n\nThe Ariane 5 ME uses a new upper stage, with increased propellant volume, powered by the new Vinci engine. Unlike the HM-7B engine, it can restart several times, allowing for complex orbital maneuvers such as insertion of two satellites into different orbits, direct insertion into geosynchronous orbit, planetary exploration missions, and guaranteed upper stage deorbiting or insertion into graveyard orbit.\n\nThe new launcher also includes a lengthened fairing up to 20m and a new dual launch system to accommodate larger satellites. Compared to an Ariane 5 ECA model, the payload to GTO increases by 15% to 11.5 tonnes and the cost-per-kilogram of each launch is projected to decline by 20%.\n\nOriginally known as the Ariane 5 ECB, was to have its first flight in 2006. However, the failure of the first ECA flight in 2002, combined with a deteriorating satellite industry, caused ESA to cancel development in 2003. Development of the Vinci engine continued, though at a lower pace. The ESA Council of Ministers agreed to fund development of the new upper stage in November 2008.\nIn 2009, EADS Astrium was awarded a €200 million contract, and on April 10, 2012 received another €112 million contract to continue development of the Ariane 5 ME with total development effort expected to cost €1 billion.\n\nOn 21 November 2012, ESA agreed to continue with the Ariane 5 ME to meet the challenge of lower priced competitors. It was agreed the Vinci upper stage would also be used as the second stage of a new Ariane 6, and further commonality would be sought. Ariane 5 ME qualification flight is scheduled for mid-2018, followed by gradual introduction into service.\n\nOn 2 December 2014, ESA decided to stop funding the development of Ariane 5 ME and instead focus on Ariane 6 which should have a lower cost per launch and allow more flexibility in the payloads (using two or four P120C solid boosters depending on total payload mass).\n\nWork on the Ariane 5 EAP motors have been continued in the Vega programme. The Vega 1st stage engine—the P80 engine—is a shorter derivation of the EAP. The P80 booster casing is made of filament wound graphite epoxy, much lighter than the current stainless steel casing. A new composite steerable nozzle has been developed while new thermal insulation material and a narrower throat improve the expansion ratio and subsequently the overall performance. Additionally, the nozzle now has electromechanical actuators which have replaced the heavier hydraulic ones used for thrust vector control.\n\nThese developments will probably later make their way back into the Ariane programme. The incorporation of the ESC-B with the improvements to the solid motor casing and an uprated Vulcain engine would deliver to LEO. This would be developed for any lunar missions but the performance of such a design may not be possible if the higher Max-Q for the launch of this rocket poses a constraint on the mass delivered to orbit.\n\nThe design brief of the next generation rocket called for a lower-cost and smaller rocket capable of launching a single satellite of up to 6.5 tonnes to GTO. However, after several permutations the finalized design was nearly identical in performance to the Ariane 5, focusing instead on lowering fabrication costs and launch prices.\n\nDevelopment is projected to cost €4 billion. Its first test launch is set for 2021. , Ariane 6 is projected to be launched for about €70 million per flight or about half of the Ariane 5 current price.\n\nAriane 5's first test flight (Ariane 5 Flight 501) on 4 June 1996 failed, with the rocket self-destructing 37 seconds after launch because of a malfunction in the control software. A data conversion from 64-bit floating point value to 16-bit signed integer value to be stored in a variable representing horizontal bias caused a processor trap (operand error) because the floating point value was too large to be represented by a 16-bit signed integer. The software was originally written for the Ariane 4 where efficiency considerations (the computer running the software had an 80% maximum workload requirement) led to four variables being protected with a handler while three others, including the horizontal bias variable, were left unprotected because it was thought that they were \"physically limited or that there was a large margin of error\". The software, written in Ada, was included in the Ariane 5 through the reuse of an entire Ariane 4 subsystem despite the fact that the particular software containing the bug, which was just a part of the subsystem, was not required by the Ariane 5 because it has a different preparation sequence than the Ariane 4.\n\nThe second test flight (L502, on 30 October 1997) was a partial failure. The Vulcain nozzle caused a roll problem, leading to premature shutdown of the core stage. The upper stage operated successfully, but it could not reach the intended orbit.\n\nA subsequent test flight (L503, on 21 October 1998) proved successful and the first commercial launch (L504) occurred on 10 December 1999 with the launch of the XMM-Newton X-ray observatory satellite.\n\nAnother partial failure occurred on 12 July 2001, with the delivery of two satellites into an incorrect orbit, at only half the height of the intended GTO. The ESA Artemis telecommunications satellite was able to reach its intended orbit on 31 January 2003, through the use of its experimental ion propulsion system.\n\nThe next launch did not occur until 1 March 2002, when the Envisat environmental satellite successfully reached an orbit above the Earth in the 11th launch. At , it was the heaviest single payload until the launch of the first ATV on 9 March 2008 (19,360 kg).\n\nThe first launch of the ECA variant on 11 December 2002 ended in failure when a main booster problem caused the rocket to veer off-course, forcing its self-destruction three minutes into the flight. Its payload of two communications satellites (Stentor and Hot Bird 7), valued at about EUR 630 million, was lost in the ocean. The fault was determined to have been caused by a leak in coolant pipes allowing the nozzle to overheat. After this failure, Arianespace SA delayed the expected January 2003 launch for the Rosetta mission to 26 February 2004, but this was again delayed to early March 2004 due to a minor fault in the foam that protects the cryogenic tanks on the Ariane 5. As of June 2017, the failure of the first ECA launch was the last failure of an Ariane 5; since then, all subsequent launches have been successful, with 80 consecutive successes that stretch back to 9 April 2003 with the launch of INSAT-3A and Galaxy 12 satellites.\n\nOn 27 September 2003 the last Ariane 5 G boosted three satellites (including the first European lunar probe, SMART-1), in Flight 162. On 18 July 2004 an Ariane 5 G+ boosted what was at the time the heaviest telecommunication satellite ever, Anik F2, weighing almost .\n\nThe first successful launch of the Ariane 5 ECA took place on 12 February 2005. The payload consisted of the XTAR-EUR military communications satellite, a 'SLOSHSAT' small scientific satellite and a MaqSat B2 payload simulator. The launch had been originally scheduled for October 2004, but additional testing and the military requiring a launch at that time (of a Helios 2A observation satellite) delayed the attempt.\n\nOn 11 August 2005, the first Ariane 5 GS (featuring the Ariane 5 ECA's improved solid motors) boosted Thaïcom-4/iPStar-1, the heaviest telecommunications satellite to date at , into orbit.\n\nOn 16 November 2005, the third Ariane 5 ECA launch (the second successful ECA launch) took place. It carried a dual payload consisting of Spaceway-F2 for DirecTV and Telkom-2 for PT Telekomunikasi of Indonesia. This was the rocket's heaviest dual payload to date, at more than .\n\nOn 27 May 2006, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket set a new commercial payload lifting record of 8.2 tonnes. The dual-payload consisted of the Thaicom 5 and Satmex 6 satellites.\n\nOn 4 May 2007 the Ariane 5 ECA set another new commercial record, lifting into transfer orbit the Astra 1L and Galaxy 17 communication satellites with a combined weight of 8.6 tonnes, and a total payload weight of 9.4 tonnes. This record was again broken by another Ariane 5 ECA, launching the Skynet 5B and Star One C1 satellites, on 11 November 2007. The total payload weight for this launch was .\n\nOn 9 March 2008, the first Ariane 5 ES-ATV was launched to deliver the first ATV called \"Jules Verne\" to the International Space Station. The ATV was the heaviest payload ever launched by a European rocket, providing supplies to the space station with necessary propellant, water, air and dry cargo. This was the first operational Ariane mission which involved an engine restart in the upper stage. (The ES-ATV Aestus EPS upper stage was restartable while the ECA HM7-B engine was not.)\n\nOn 1 July 2009, an Ariane 5 ECA launched TerreStar-1, the largest commercial telecommunication satellite ever built.\n\nOn 28 October 2010, an Ariane 5 ECA launched Eutelsat's W3B (part of its W Series of satellites) and Broadcasting Satellite System Corporation (B-SAT)'s BSAT-3b satellites into orbit. However, the W3B satellite failed to operate shortly after the successful launch and was written off as a total loss due to an oxidizer leak in the satellite's main propulsion system. The BSAT-3b satellite, however, is operating normally.\n\nOn 22 April 2011, the Ariane 5 ECA flight VA-201 broke a commercial record, lifting Yahsat 1A and Intelsat New Dawn with a total payload weight of 10,064 kg to transfer orbit. This record was later broken again during the launch of Ariane 5 ECA flight VA-208 on 2 August 2012, lifting a total of 10,182 kg into the planned geosynchronous transfer orbit, which was broken again 6 months later on flight VA-212 with 10,317 kg sent towards geosynchronous transfer orbit. In June 2016 the GTO record was raised to 10,730 kg, on the first rocket in history that carried a satellite dedicated to financial institutions. The payload record was pushed a further 5 kg to on 24 August with the launch of Intelsat 33e and Intelsat 36. On 1 June 2017, the payload record was broken again to carrying ViaSat 2 and Eutelsat 172B.\n\nAriane 5 rockets have accumulated 94 launches since 1996, 90 of which were successful, yielding a success rate. Between April 2003 and June 2017, Ariane 5 has flown 80 consecutive missions without failure.\n\n Ariane 5 had 20 missions on its launch manifest. Up to seven launches are planned for the year 2017: six with dual communications satellites due to geosynchronous orbit, and one with 4 Galileo satellites. A flight in March 2017 was postponed to May due to transportation to the launch site being restricted by a blockade erected by striking workers.\n\n"}
{"id": "3112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3112", "title": "Arianespace", "text": "Arianespace\n\nArianespace SA is a multinational company founded in 1980 as the world's first commercial launch service provider. It undertakes the production, operation, and marketing of the Ariane programme. The company offers a diverse portfolio of launch vehicles: the heavy-lift Ariane 5 for dual launches to geostationary transfer orbit, the Soyuz-2 as a medium-lift alternative, and the solid-fueled Vega for lighter payloads.\n\n, Arianespace has launched more than 550 satellites in 254 launches over years (236 Ariane missions minus the first 8 flights handled by CNES, 17 Soyuz-2 missions and 9 Vega missions). The first commercial flight managed by the new entity was Spacenet F1 launched on May 23, 1984. Arianespace uses the Guiana Space Center in French Guiana as its main launch site. Through shareholding in Starsem, it can also offer commercial Soyuz launches from the Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. It has its headquarters in Courcouronnes, Essonne, France, near Évry.\n\nOn 21 October 2011 Arianespace launched the first Soyuz rocket ever from outside former Soviet territory. The payload was two Galileo navigation satellites.\n\nArianespace primary shareholders are its suppliers, in various European nations. \nArianespace currently has 18 shareholders:\n\nArianespace shareholding has been restructured with the creation of an Airbus Safran Launchers company that will develop and manufacture the Ariane 6 launcher. Airbus and Safran shareholdings were pooled along with the purchase of the French governments CNES stake to form a partnership company holding just under 74% of Arianespace shares while the remaining 26% is spread across companies in ten countries including further Airbus subsidiaries.\n\n\nIn 2004, Arianespace held more than 50 percent of the world market for boosting satellites to geostationary transfer orbit (GTO).\n\nThe disruptive force represented by new sector entrant SpaceX forced Arianespace to cut workforce and focus on cost-cutting to decrease costs to remain competitive against the new low-cost entrant in the launch sector. According to an Arianespace managing director, \"It's quite clear there's a very significant challenge coming from SpaceX,\" he said. \"Therefore things have to change … and the whole European industry is being restructured, consolidated, rationalised and streamlined.\"\n\nIn the midst of pricing pressure from U.S. company SpaceX, Arianespace made a November 2013 announcement of pricing flexibility for the \"lighter satellites\" it carries to Geostationary orbits aboard its Ariane 5.\nIn early 2014, Arianespace requested additional subsidies from European governments to face the competition from SpaceX and unfavorable changes in the Euro-Dollar exchange rate. Reducing pricing allowed Arianespace to sign four additional contracts in September 2014 for a lower slots on an Ariane 5 SYLDA dispenser for the satellites that otherwise could be flown on SpaceX launch vehicle. Overall Arianespace signed 11 contracts in 2014 until September, with two additional being in a late stage of negotiations. Arianespace has a backlog of launches worth billion with 38 satellites to be launched on Ariane 5, 7 on Soyuz and 9 on Vega, claiming 60% of the global satellite launch market.\nBy November 2014, SpaceX had \"already begun to take market share\" from Arianespace, and Eutelsat CEO Michel de Rosen—a major customer of Arianespace—said that \"Each year that passes will see SpaceX advance, gain market share and further reduce its costs through economies of scale.\"\n\nCurrently Arianespace operates 3 launch vehicles, including two versions of Ariane 5:\n\nAdditionally Arianespace offers optional back-up launch service on H-IIA through Launch Services Alliance.\n\nSince the first launch in 1979, there have been several versions of the Ariane launch vehicle:\n\nNew Ariane 6 vehicle is in development. It would be payload wise in league of Ariane 5 and has tentatively its first test flight in 2020 as of 2016.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3114", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3114", "title": "Amiga 500 Plus", "text": "Amiga 500 Plus\n\nThe Commodore Amiga 500 Plus (often A500 Plus or simply A500+) is an enhanced version of the original Amiga 500 computer. It was notable for introducing new versions of Kickstart and Workbench, and for some minor improvements in the custom chips, known as the Enhanced Chip Set (or ECS).\n\nThe A500+ was released in several markets (including many European countries), but was never sold officially in the U.S.\n\nAlthough officially introduced in 1992, some Amiga 500 Plus units had already been sold (masquerading as Amiga 500 models, and with no prior announcement) during late 1991. It has been speculated that Commodore had already sold out the remaining stocks of Amiga 500s, before the run up to the profitable Christmas sales period. In order to make enough A500s before Christmas, Commodore used stocks of the new 8A revision motherboards destined for the A500+. Many users were unaware that they were purchasing anything other than a standard Amiga 500. Although the Amiga 500+ was an improvement to the Amiga 500, it was minor. It was discontinued and replaced by the Amiga 600 in summer 1992, making it the shortest lived Amiga model.\n\nCommodore created the A500+ for a couple of reasons. The first was cost reduction; minor changes were made to the motherboard to make it cheaper to produce. It was also so that Commodore could introduce the new version of the Amiga Operating system, 2.04.\n\nDue to the new Kickstart, quite a few popular games (such as Treasure Island Dizzy, SWIV, and Lotus Esprit Turbo Challenge) failed to work on the Amiga 500+, and some people took them back to dealers demanding an original Kickstart 1.3 Amiga 500. This problem was solved by third parties who produced Kickstart ROM switching boards, that could allow the Amiga 500+ to be downgraded to Kickstart 1.2 or 1.3. It also encouraged game developers to use better programming habits, which was important since Commodore already had plans for the introduction of the next-generation Amiga 1200 computer. A program, Relokick, was also released (and included with an issue of CU Amiga) which loaded a Kickstart 1.3 ROM image into memory and booted the machine into Kickstart 1.3, allowing incompatible software to run. In some cases, updated compatible versions of games were later released, such as budget versions of Lotus 1 and SWIV.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3116", "title": "Accumulator (computing)", "text": "Accumulator (computing)\n\nIn a computer's central processing unit (CPU), an accumulator is a register in which intermediate arithmetic and logic results are stored. \n\nWithout a register like an accumulator, it would be necessary to write the result of each calculation (addition, multiplication, shift, etc.) to main memory, perhaps only to be read right back again for use in the next operation. Access to main memory is slower than access to a register like the accumulator because the technology used for the large main memory is slower (but cheaper) than that used for a register. Early electronic computer systems were often split into two groups, those with accumulators and those without.\n\nModern computer systems often have multiple general purpose registers that operate as accumulators, and the term is no longer as common as it once was. However, a number of special-purpose processors still use a single accumulator for their work, in order to simplify their design.\n\nMathematical operations often take place in a stepwise fashion, using the results from one operation as the input to the next. For instance, a manual calculation of a worker's weekly payroll might look something like:\n\nA computer program carrying out the same task would follow the same basic sequence of operations, although the values being looked up would all be stored in computer memory. In early computers the number of hours would likely be held on a punch card and the pay rate in some other form of memory, perhaps a magnetic drum. Once the multiplication is complete, the result needs to be placed somewhere. On a \"drum machine\" this would likely be back to the drum, an operation that takes considerable time. And then the very next operation has to read that value back in, which introduces another considerable delay.\n\nAccumulators dramatically improve performance in systems like these by providing a scratchpad area where the results of one operation can be fed to the next one for little or no performance penalty. In the example above, the basic weekly pay would be calculated and placed in the accumulator, which could then immediately be used by the income tax calculation. This removes one save and one read operation from the sequence, operations that generally took tens to hundreds of times as long as the multiplication itself.\n\nAn accumulator machine, also called a 1-operand machine, or a CPU with \"accumulator-based architecture\", is a kind of CPU where, although it may have several registers, the CPU mostly stores the results of calculations in one special register, typically called \"the accumulator\". Almost all early computers were accumulator machines with only the high-performance \"supercomputers\" having multiple registers. Then as mainframe systems gave way to microcomputers, accumulator architectures were again popular with the MOS 6502 being a notable example. Many 8-bit microcontrollers that are still popular as of 2014, such as the PICmicro and 8051, are accumulator-based machines.\n\nModern CPUs are typically 2-operand or 3-operand machines. The additional operands specify which one of many general purpose registers (also called \"general purpose accumulators\") are used as the source and destination for calculations. These CPUs are not considered \"accumulator machines\".\n\nThe characteristic which distinguishes one register as being the accumulator of a computer architecture is that the accumulator (if the architecture were to have one) would be used as an \"implicit\" operand for arithmetic instructions. For instance, a CPU might have an instruction like: codice_1 that adds the value read from memory location \"memaddress\" to the value in the accumulator, placing the result back in the accumulator. The accumulator is not identified in the instruction by a register number; it is implicit in the instruction and no other register can be specified in the instruction. Some architectures use a particular register as an accumulator in some instructions, but other instructions use register numbers for explicit operand specification.\n\nAny system that uses a single \"memory\" to store the result of multiple operations can be considered an accumulator. J. Presper Eckert refers to even the earliest adding machines of Gottfried Leibniz and Blaise Pascal as accumulator-based systems.\n\nHistorical convention dedicates a register to \"the accumulator\", an \"arithmetic organ\" that literally accumulates its number during a sequence of arithmetic operations:\n\nJust a few of the instructions are, for example (with some modern interpretation):\n\nNo convention exists regarding the names for operations from registers to accumulator and from accumulator to registers. Tradition (e.g. Donald Knuth's (1973) hypothetical MIX computer), for example, uses two instructions called \"load accumulator\" from register/memory (e.g. \"LDA r\") and \"store accumulator\" to register/memory (e.g. \"STA r\"). Knuth's model has many other instructions as well.\n\nThe 1945 configuration of ENIAC had 20 accumulators, which could operate in parallel. Each one could store an eight decimal digit number and add to it (or subtract from it) a number it received. Most of IBM's early binary \"scientific\" computers, beginning with the vacuum tube IBM 701 in 1952, used a single 36-bit accumulator, along with a separate multiplier/quotient register to handle operations with longer results. The IBM 650, a decimal machine, had one 10 digit accumulator; the IBM 7070, a later, transistorized decimal machine had three accumulators.\n\nThe 12-bit PDP-8 was one of the first minicomputers to use accumulators, and inspired many later machines. The PDP-8 had but one accumulator. The HP 2100 and Data General Nova had 2 and 4 accumulators. The Nova was created when this follow-on to the PDP-8 was rejected in favor of what would become the PDP-11. The Nova provided four accumulators, AC0-AC3, although AC2 and AC3 could also be used to provide offset addresses, tending towards more generality of usage for the registers. The PDP-11 introduced a more contemporary model of general registers, numbered R0-R7 or more, adopted by most later CISC and RISC machines.\nEarly 4-bit and 8-bit microprocessors such as the 4004, 8008 and numerous others, typically had single accumulators. The 8051 microcontroller has two, a primary accumulator and a secondary accumulator, where the second is used by instructions only when multiplying (MUL AB) or dividing (DIV AB); the former splits the 16-bit result between the two 8-bit accumulators, whereas the latter stores the quotient on the primary accumulator A and the remainder in the secondary accumulator B. As a direct descendent of the 8008, the 8080, and the 8086, the modern ubiquitous Intel x86 processors still uses the primary accumulator EAX and the secondary accumulator EDX for multiplication and division of large numbers. For instance, MUL ECX will multiply the 32-bit registers ECX and EAX and split the 64-bit result between EAX and EDX. However, MUL and DIV are special cases, other arithmetic-logical instructions (ADD, SUB, CMP, AND, OR, XOR, TEST) may specify any of the eight registers EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI as the accumulator (i.e. left operand and destination); this is also supported for multiply if the upper half of the result is not required. x86 is thus a fairly general register architecture, despite being based on an accumulator model. The 64-bit extension of x86, x86-64, has been further generalized to 16 instead of 8 general registers.\n\n"}
{"id": "3117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3117", "title": "Abu Zubaydah", "text": "Abu Zubaydah\n\nAbu Zubaydah ( ; , \"Abū Zubaydah\"; born March 12, 1971, as Zayn al-Abidin Muhammad Husayn) is a Saudi Arabian citizen currently held by the U.S. in the Guantanamo Bay detention camp in Cuba. He is held under the authority of Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists (AUMF).\n\nZubaydah was arrested in Pakistan in March 2002 and has been in United States custody ever since, including four-and-a-half years in the secret prison network of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). He was transferred among prisons in various countries as part of a United States rendition program. During his time in CIA custody, Zubaydah was extensively interrogated; he was water-boarded 83 times and subjected to numerous other torture techniques including forced nudity, sleep deprivation, confinement in small dark boxes, deprivation of solid food, stress positions, and physical assaults. While in CIA custody, Zubaydah lost his left eye. Videotapes of some of Zubaydah's interrogations are amongst those destroyed by the CIA in 2005.\n\nZubaydah and ten other \"high-value detainees\" were transferred to Guantanamo in September 2006. He and other former CIA detainees are held in Camp 7, where conditions are the most isolating. At his Combatant Status Review Tribunal in 2007, Zubaydah said he was told that the CIA realized he was not significant.\n\nOn July 24, 2014, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ordered the Polish government to pay Zubaydah €100,000 in damages. It also awarded him €30,000 to cover his costs. Poland cooperated with the US, allowing the CIA to hold and torture Zubaydah on its territory in 2002–2003. Zubaydah said through his US lawyer that he would be donating the full €100,000 in damages to victims of torture. Joseph Margulies was a lawyer for Zubaydah.\n\nAccording to his younger brother Hesham, they had eight siblings. Hesham remembers his older brother \"as a happy-go-lucky guy, and something of a womanizer.\" Born in Saudi Arabia, Zubaydah moved to the West Bank as a teenager, where he joined in Palestinian demonstrations against the Israelis. Zubaydah is reported to have studied computer science in Pune, India prior to his travel to Afghanistan/Pakistan at the age of 20 in 1991. He joined the mujahideen in the Afghan civil war, perhaps serving under Mohamad Kamal Elzahabi. In 1992, Zubaydah was injured in a mortar shell blast, which left shrapnel in his head and caused severe memory loss, as well as the loss of the ability to speak for over one year.\n\nZubaydah eventually became involved in the jihad training site known as the Khalden training camp, where he oversaw the flow of recruits and obtained passports and paperwork for men transferring out of Khalden. He may also have worked as an instructor there. Although originally described as an Al Qaeda training camp, this alleged connection, which has been used as justification for holding Zubaydah and others as enemy combatants, has come under scrutiny from multiple sources,<ref name=\"9/11CommissionReport\">\"9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States\" , July 22, 2006</ref> and the camp may have shuttered its doors in 2001 in response to an ideological division with Al Qaeda.\n\nBy 1999, the United States government was attempting to surveil Zubaydah. By March 2000, United States officials were reporting that Zubaydah was a \"senior Bin Laden official,\" the \"former head of Egypt-based Islamic Jihad,\" a \"trusted aide\" to Bin Laden with \"growing power,\" who had \"played a key role in the East Africa embassy attacks.\" Zubaydah was convicted \"in absentia\" in Jordan and sentenced to death by a Jordanian court for his role in plots to bomb U.S. and Israeli targets there. A senior Middle East security official said Zubaydah had directed the Jordanian cell and was part of \"Bin Laden's inner circle.\"\n\nIn August 2001, the classified FBI report, \"Bin Laden Determined To Strike in US\", said that the foiled millennium bomber, Ahmed Ressam, had confessed that Zubaydah had encouraged him to blow up the Los Angeles airport and facilitated his mission. The report said that Zubaydah was also planning his own attack on the U.S. However, when Ressam was tried in December 2001, federal prosecutors did not try to connect him to Zubaydah or refer to any of this supposed evidence in its case. After the trial, Ressam recanted his confession, saying he had been coerced into giving it.\n\nAccording to a psychological evaluation conducted upon his capture, Zubaydah allegedly served as Osama Bin Laden's senior lieutenant and counter-intelligence officer (i.e. third or fourth highest-ranking member of al Qaeda), managed a network of training camps, was involved in every major terrorist operation carried out by al Qaeda (including the planning of 9/11), and was engaged in planning future terrorist attacks against U.S. interests. These statements were widely echoed by members of the Bush administration and other US officials. Zubaydah's perceived \"value\" as a detainee would later be used by President Bush to justify the use of \"enhanced interrogation techniques\" and Zubaydah's detention in secret CIA prisons around the world. However, Zubaydah's connection to Al Qaeda is now often said to have been overstated, and in response to his habeas corpus petition, the U.S. Government stated in 2009 that they did not contend that Zubaydah had any involvement with the 9/11 attacks or that he had even been a member of Al Qaeda.\n\nOn March 28, 2002, CIA and FBI agents, in conjunction with Pakistani intelligence services, raided several safe houses in Pakistan searching for Zubaydah. Zubaydah was apprehended from one of the targeted safe houses in Faisalabad, Pakistan. The Pakistani intelligence service had paid a small amount for a tip on his whereabouts. The United States paid far more to Pakistan for its assistance; a CIA source later said, \"We paid $10 million for Zubaydah.\" The Pakistan ISI built a new headquarters on 35 acres outside Islamabad with the money and also bought a helicopter.\n\nDuring the raid, Zubaydah was shot in the thigh, the testicle, and the stomach with rounds from an AK-47 assault rifle. Not recognised at first, he was piled into a pick-up truck along with other prisoners by the Pakistani forces, until a senior FBI agent identified him. He was taken by the FBI to a Pakistani hospital nearby and treated for his wounds. The attending doctor told John Kiriakou, the co-leader of the CIA group which apprehended Zubaydah, that he had never before seen a patient survive such severe wounds. The FBI and CIA flew in a doctor from Johns Hopkins University to ensure Zubaydah would survive during transit out of Pakistan.\n\nHis pocket litter supposedly contained two bank cards which showed he had access to Saudi and Kuwaiti bank accounts; most al-Qaeda members used the preferred, untraceable hawala banking. According to James Risen, \"It is not clear whether an investigation of the cards simply fell through the cracks, or whether they were ignored because no one wanted to know the answers about connections between al Qaeda and important figures in the Middle East – particularly in Saudi Arabia.\" One of Risen's sources chalks up the failure to investigate the cards to incompetence rather than foul play: \"The cards were sent back to Washington and were never fully exploited. I think nobody ever looked at them because of incompetence.\"\n\nWhen Americans investigated the cards, they worked with \"a Muslim financier with a questionable past, and with connections to the Afghan Taliban, al Qaeda, and Saudi intelligence.\" Risen wrote, \"Saudi intelligence officials had seized all of the records related to the card from the Saudi financial institution in question; the records then disappeared. There was no longer any way to trace the money that had gone into the account.\"\n\nA search of the safehouse turned up Zubaydah's personal 10,000-page diaries, in which he recorded his thoughts as a young boy, old man, and at his current age. What appears to be split personalities is how Zubaydah was piecing his memories together after his 1992 shrapnel head wound. As part of his therapy to regain his memories, he began recording the diary that detailed his life, emotions, and what people were telling him. He split information into categories, such as what he knew about himself and what people told him, and listed them under different names to distinguish one set from the other. This was later incorrectly interpreted by some analysts reviewing the diary as symptoms of split personality disorder.\n\nZubaydah was turned over to the CIA. Reports later alleged that he was transferred to secret CIA-operated prisons, known as black sites, in Pakistan, Thailand, Afghanistan, Poland, Northern Africa, and Diego Garcia. Historically, renditions of prisoners to countries which commit torture have been illegal. A memo written by John Yoo and signed by Jay Bybee of the Office of the Legal Counsel, DOJ, days before Zubaydah's capture, provided a legal opinion providing for CIA renditions of detainees to places such as Thailand. In March 2009, the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee launched a year-long study on how the CIA operated the secret prisons, or black sites, around the world.\n\nIn the spring of 2002, immediately following the capture of Zubaydah, top Bush administration officials, Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of State Colin Powell, CIA Director George Tenet, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and US Attorney General John Ashcroft discussed at length whether or not the CIA could legally use harsh techniques against him. Condoleezza Rice specifically mentioned the SERE program during the meeting, saying, \"I recall being told that U.S. military personnel were subjected to training to certain physical and psychological interrogation techniques...\"\n\nIn addition, in 2002 and 2003, the administration briefed several Democratic Congressional leaders on the proposed \"enhanced interrogation techniques.\" These congressional leaders included Nancy Pelosi, the future Speaker of the House, and Representative Jane Harman. Congressional officials have stated that the attitude in the briefings ranged from \"quiet acquiescence, if not downright support.\" The documents show that top U.S. Officials were intimately involved in the discussion and approval of the harsher interrogation techniques used on Zubaydah. Condoleezza Rice ultimately told the CIA the harsher interrogation tactics were acceptable, and Dick Cheney stated, \"I signed off on it; so did others.\" During the discussions, US Attorney General John Ashcroft is reported as saying, \"Why are we talking about this in the White House? History will not judge this kindly.\"\n\nZubaydah was interrogated by two separate interrogation teams: the first from the FBI and one from the CIA. Ali Soufan, one of the FBI interrogators, later testified in 2009 on these issues to the Senate Committee that was investigating detainee treatment. Soufan, who witnessed part of the CIA interrogation of Zubaydah, described his treatment under the CIA as torture. The International Committee of the Red Cross and others later reached the same conclusion. While in CIA custody, Zubaydah lost his left eye.\n\nBecause of the urgency felt about the interrogation of Zubaydah, the CIA had consulted with the president about how to proceed. The General Counsel of the CIA asked for a legal opinion from the Office of Legal Counsel, Department of Justice about what was permissible during interrogation.\n\nIn early July 2002 the Associate General Council CTC/Legal Group started drafting a memo to the Attorney General requesting the approval of \"aggressive\" interrogation methods, which otherwise would be prohibited under the provisions of Section 2340-2340B, Title 18, United States Code, on Abu Zubaydah. This memo, drafted by Office of Legal Counsel, Jay Bybee and his assistant John Yoo, is also referred to as the first Torture Memo. Addressed to CIA acting General Counsel John A. Rizzo at his request, the purpose of the memo was to describe and authorize specific enhanced interrogation techniques to be used on Zubaydah. On July 26, 2002 Deputy Assistant Attorney General John Yoo informed the CIA that Attorney General John Ashcroft had approved waterboarding of Abu Zubaydah.\n\nJournalists including Jane Mayer, Joby Warrick and Peter Finn, and Alex Koppelman have reported the CIA was already using these harsh tactics before the memo authorizing their use was written, and that it was used to provide after-the-fact legal support for harsh interrogation techniques. A Department of Justice 2009 report regarding prisoner abuses reportedly stated the memos were prepared one month after Zubaydah had already been subjected to the specific techniques authorized in August 1, 2002, memo. John Kiriakou stated in July 2009 that Zubaydah was waterboarded in the early summer of 2002, months before August 1, 2002, memo was written.\n\nThe memo described ten techniques which the interrogators wanted to use: \"(1) attention grasp, (2) walling, (3) facial hold, (4) facial slap (insult slap), (5) cramped confinement, (6) wall standing, (7) stress positions, (8) sleep deprivation, (9) insects placed in a confinement box, and (10) the waterboard.\" Many of the techniques were, until then, generally considered illegal. Many other techniques developed by the CIA were held to constitute inhumane and degrading treatment and torture under the United Nations Convention against Torture and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\n\nAs reported later, many of these interrogation techniques were previously considered illegal under U.S. and international law and treaties at the time of Zubaydah's capture. For instance, the United States had prosecuted Japanese military officials after World War II and American soldiers after the Vietnam War for waterboarding. Since 1930, the United States had defined sleep deprivation as an illegal form of torture. Many other techniques developed by the CIA constitute inhuman and degrading treatment and torture under the United Nations Convention against Torture, and Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\n\nThe CIA subjected Zubaydah to various forms of increasingly harsh interrogation techniques, including temperature extremes, music played at debilitating volumes, and sexual humiliation. Zubaydah was also subjected to beatings, isolation, waterboarding, long-time standing, continuous cramped confinement, and sleep deprivation.\n\nDuring Zubaydah's interrogation, President Bush learned he was on painkillers for his wounds and was proving resistant. He said to the CIA director George Tenet, \"Who authorized putting him on pain medication?\" It was later reported that Zubaydah was denied painkillers during his interrogation.\n\nZubaydah was one of three or more high-value detainees to be waterboarded. The Bush administration in 2007 said that Zubaydah had been waterboarded once. John Kiriakou, a CIA officer who had seen the cables regarding Zubaydah's interrogation, publicly said in 2009 that Zubaydah was waterboarded once for 35 seconds before he started talking.\n\nIntelligence sources claimed as early as 2008 that Zubaydah had been waterboarded no less than ten times in the span of one week. Zubaydah was waterboarded 83 times within the month of August 2002, the month the CIA was authorized to use this enhanced interrogation techniques for him. In January 2010, Kiriakou, in a memoir, said, \"Now we know that Zubaydah was waterboarded eighty-three times in a single month, raising questions about how much useful information he actually supplied.\"\n\nIn August 2010 the Associated Press reported that the CIA, having concluded its agents had gotten most of the information from Zubaydah, in September 2003 transferred him and three other high-value detainees to Guantanamo. They were held at what was informally known as \"Strawberry Fields,\" a secret camp within the complex built especially for former CIA detainees. Concerned that a pending Supreme Court decision, \"Rasul v. Bush\" (2004), might go against the Bush administration and require providing the prisoners with counsel and having to reveal data about them, on March 27, 2004, the CIA took the four men back into custody and transported them out of Guantanamo to one of their secret sites. At the time, the moves were all kept secret.\n\nIn February 2007, the International Committee of the Red Cross concluded a report on the treatment of \"14 high-value detainees,\" who had been held by the CIA and, after September 2006, by the military at Guantanamo. The ICRC described the twelve enhanced interrogation techniques covered in the OLC memos to the CIA: suffocation by water (which is described as \"torture\" by numerous US officials), prolonged stress standing position, beatings by use of a collar, beating and kicking, confinement in a box, prolonged nudity, sleep deprivation, exposure to cold temperature, prolonged shackling, threats of ill-treatment, forced shaving, and deprivation/restricted provision of solid food. Zubaydah was the only detainee of the 14 interviewed who had been subjected to all 12 of these interrogation techniques. He was also the only one of the 14 detainees to be put into close confinement.\n\nThe final memo mentioned Zubaydah several times. It claimed that due to the enhanced interrogation techniques, Zubaydah \"provided significant information on two operatives, [including] José Padilla[,] who planned to build and detonate a 'dirty bomb' in the Washington DC area.\" This claim is strongly disputed by Ali Soufan, the FBI interrogator who first interrogated Zubaydah following his capture, by traditional means. He said the most valuable information was gained before torture was used. Other intelligence officers have also disputed that claim. Soufan, when asked in 2009 by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse during a Congressional hearing if the memo was incorrect, testified that it was. The memo noted that not all of the waterboarding sessions were necessary for Zubaydah, since the on-scene interrogation team determined he had stopped producing actionable intelligence. The memo reads:\nThis is not to say that the interrogation program has worked perfectly. According to the IG Report, the CIA, at least initially, could not always distinguish detainees who had information but were successfully resisting interrogation from those who did not actually have the information. See IG Report at 83–85. On at least one occasion, this may have resulted in what might be deemed in retrospect to have been the unnecessary use of enhanced techniques. On that occasion, although the on-scene interrogation team judged Zubaydah to be compliant, elements within CIA Headquarters still believed he was withholding information. See id at 84. At the direction of CIA Headquarters, interrogators therefore used the waterboard one more time on Zubaydah.\nJohn McLaughlin, former acting CIA director, stated in 2006, \"I totally disagree with the view that the capture of Zubaydah was unimportant. Zubaydah was woven through all of the intelligence prior to 9/11 that signaled a major attack was coming, and his capture yielded a great deal of important information.\"\n\nIn his 2007 memoir, former CIA Director George Tenet writes:\nA published report in 2006 contended that Zubaydah was mentally unstable and that the administration had overstated his importance. Baloney. Zubaydah had been at the crossroads of many al-Qa'ida operations and was in position to – and did – share critical information with his interrogators. Apparently, the source of the rumor that Zubaydah was unbalanced was his personal diary, in which he adopted various personas. From that shaky perch, some junior Freudians leapt to the conclusion that Zubaydah had multiple personalities. In fact, Agency psychiatrists eventually determined that in his diary he was using a sophisticated literary device to express himself. And, boy, did he express himself.\n\nZubaydah's capture was touted as the biggest of the War on Terror until that of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed.<ref name=\"9/11MastermindNabbed\">\"Alleged 9-11 Mastermind Nabbed\" CBS News, March 1, 2003</ref> The director of the FBI stated Zubaydah's capture would help deter future attacks.\n\nIn a speech in 2006, President Bush claimed that Zubaydah revealed useful intelligence when enhanced interrogation was used, including identification of two important suspects and information that allegedly helped foil a terrorist attack on American soil. These claims directly conflict with the reports of the F.B.I. agents who first interrogated Zubaydah. He gave them the names before torture was used, and the third piece of information came from other sources who had been receiving crucial pieces of information from him without the use of harsher techniques, as well as other government officials.\n\nThe Bush administration relied on some of Zubaydah's claims in justifying the invasion of Iraq. U.S. officials stated that the allegations that Iraq and al-Qaeda were linked in the training of people on chemical weapons came from Zubaydah. The officials noted there was no independent verification of his claims.\n\nThe U.S. Government included statements made by Zubaydah in regards to al Qaeda's ability to obtain a dirty bomb to show a link between Iraq and al Qaeda. According to a Senate Intelligence Committee report of 2004, Zubaydah said that \"he had heard that an important al Qaeda associate, Abu Musab al Zarqawi, and others had good relationships with Iraqi intelligence.\" But the year before in June 2003, Zubaydah and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed were reported as saying there was no link between Saddam Hussein and al Qaeda.\n\nIn the Senate Armed Services Committee 2008 report on the abuses of detainees, the Bush administration was described as having applied pressure to interrogators to find a link between Iraq and Al-Qaeda prior to the Iraq War. Major Paul Burney, a psychiatrist with the United States Army, said to the committee, \"while we were [at Guantanamo] a large part of the time we were focused on trying to establish a link between Al Qaeda and Iraq and we were not being successful.\" He said that higher-ups were \"frustrated\" and applied \"more and more pressure to resort to measures that might produce more immediate results.\"\n\nColonel Lawrence B. Wilkerson, the former chief of staff for former Secretary of State Colin Powell said:\nLikewise, what I have learned is that as the administration authorized harsh interrogation in April and May of 2002—well before the Justice Department had rendered any legal opinion—its principal priority for intelligence was not aimed at pre-empting another terrorist attack on the U.S. but discovering a smoking gun linking Iraq and al-Qa'ida.\n\nSo furious was this effort that on one particular detainee, even when the interrogation team had reported to Cheney's office that their detainee \"was compliant\" (meaning the team recommended no more torture), the VP's office ordered them to continue the enhanced methods. The detainee had not revealed any al-Qa'ida-Baghdad contacts yet. This ceased only after Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi, under waterboarding in Egypt, \"revealed\" such contacts. Of course, later we learned that al-Libi revealed these contacts only to get the torture to stop.\n\nIn 2004 media coverage of Abu Zubaydah began listing him as a \"disappeared\" prisoner, claiming he had no access to the International Red Cross. In February 2005, the CIA was reported as uncomfortable keeping Zubaydah in indefinite custody. Less than 18 months later, Zubaydah and the thirteen other high-value detainees who had been in secret CIA custody were transferred to the Guantanamo Bay detention camp.\n\nAfter his transfer, the CIA denied access to Zubaydah. In 2008, the Office of the Inspector General, Department of Justice, complained that it had been prevented from seeing him, although it was conducting a study of the US treatment of its detainees.\n\nSome people are concerned about Zubaydah's mental stability and how that has affected information he has given to interrogators. Ron Suskind noted in his book, \"The One Percent Doctrine: Deep Inside America's Pursuit of Its Enemies Since 9/11\" (2006), that Zubaydah was mentally ill or disabled due to a severe head injury. He described Zubaydah as keeping a diary \"in the voice of three people: Hani 1, Hani 2, and Hani 3\"—a boy, a young man and a middle-aged alter ego. Zubaydah's diaries spanned ten years and recorded in numbing detail \"what he ate, or wore, or trifling things [people] said.\" Dan Coleman, then the FBI's top al-Qaeda analyst, told a senior bureau official, \"This guy is insane, certifiable, split personality.\" According to Suskind, this judgment was \"echoed at the top of CIA and was briefed to the President and Vice President.\" Coleman stated Zubaydah was a \"safehouse keeper\" with mental problems, who \"claimed to know more about al-Qaeda and its inner workings than he really did.\"\n\nJoseph Margulies, Zubaydah's co-counsel, wrote in an OpEd in the \"Los Angeles Times\":\nPartly as a result of injuries he suffered while he was fighting the communists in Afghanistan, partly as a result of how those injuries were exacerbated by the CIA and partly as a result of his extended isolation, Zubaydah's mental grasp is slipping away. Today, he suffers blinding headaches and has permanent brain damage. He has an excruciating sensitivity to sounds, hearing what others do not. The slightest noise drives him nearly insane. In the last two years alone, he has experienced about 200 seizures. Already, he cannot picture his mother's face or recall his father's name. Gradually, his past, like his future, eludes him.\n\nPresident Bush referred to Zubaydah in a speech to Congress September 2006 requesting a bill to authorize military commissions, following the US Supreme Court ruling in \"Hamdan v. Rumsfeld\" (2006) that held the tribunals as formulated by the executive branch were unconstitutional. Congress rapidly passed legislation that was signed by the president.\n\nLess than one month after Zubaydah's capture, Justice Department officials said Zubaydah was \"a near-ideal candidate for a tribunal trial.\" Several months later in 2002, US officials said there was \"no rush\" to try Zubaydah via military commission.\n\nAt his Combatant Status Review Tribunal in 2007, Zubaydah said he was told that the CIA realized he was not significant.\n\"They told me, 'Sorry, we discover that you are not Number 3, not a partner, not even a fighter,' \"said Zubaydah, speaking in broken English, according to the new transcript of a Combatant Status Review Tribunal held at the U.S. military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.\"\n\nAbu Zubaydah's lawyers filed a lawsuit in July 2008 challenging his detention at Guantanamo Bay detention camps after the \"Boumediene v. Bush\" ruling. As of 2015, the judge overseeing the case, Richard W. Roberts, has failed to rule on any motions related to the case, even the preliminary ones. This has led Zubaydah's lawyers to file motion asking Judge Roberts to recuse himself for nonfeasance in January 2015. On March 16, 2016, Roberts retired early from the federal bench, citing unspecified health issues.\n\nThe judge's failure to act for nearly eight years may be related to the revelation in the Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture that Zubaydah's CIA interrogators wanted him to \"remain in isolation and incommunicado for the remainder of his life.\"\n\nThe U.S. Government has not officially charged Zubaydah with any crimes.\n\nWhen he assumed office in January 2009 President Barack Obama made a number of promises about the future of Guantanamo.\nHe promised the use of torture would cease at the camp. He promised to institute a new review system. That new review system was composed of officials from six departments, where the OARDEC reviews were conducted entirely by the Department of Defense. When it reported back, a year later, the Joint Review Task Force classified some individuals as too dangerous to be transferred from Guantanamo, even though there was no evidence to justify laying charges against them. On April 9, 2013, that document was made public after a Freedom of Information Act request.\nZayn al-lbidin Muhammed Husayn was one of the 71 individuals deemed too innocent to charge but too dangerous to release. Although Obama promised that those deemed too innocent to charge but too dangerous to release would start to receive reviews from a Periodic Review Board less than a quarter of men have received a review.\n\nOn July 24, 2014, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled that Poland had violated the European Convention on Human Rights when it cooperated with US allowing the CIA to hold and torture Zubaydah and Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri on its territory in 2002–2003. The court ordered the Polish government to pay each of the men 100,000 euros in damages. It also awarded Zubaydah 30,000 euros to cover his costs.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3118", "title": "Arithmetic", "text": "Arithmetic\n\nArithmetic (from the Greek ἀριθμός \"arithmos\", \"number\") is a branch of mathematics that consists of the study of numbers, especially the properties of the traditional operations between them—addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. Arithmetic is an elementary part of number theory, and number theory is considered to be one of the top-level divisions of modern mathematics, along with algebra, geometry, and analysis. The terms \"arithmetic\" and \"higher arithmetic\" were used until the beginning of the 20th century as synonyms for \"number theory\" and are sometimes still used to refer to a wider part of number theory.\n\nThe prehistory of arithmetic is limited to a small number of artifacts which may indicate the conception of addition and subtraction, the best-known being the Ishango bone from central Africa, dating from somewhere between 20,000 and 18,000 BC, although its interpretation is disputed.\n\nThe earliest written records indicate the Egyptians and Babylonians used all the elementary arithmetic operations as early as 2000 BC. These artifacts do not always reveal the specific process used for solving problems, but the characteristics of the particular numeral system strongly influence the complexity of the methods. The hieroglyphic system for Egyptian numerals, like the later Roman numerals, descended from tally marks used for counting. In both cases, this origin resulted in values that used a decimal base but did not include positional notation. Complex calculations with Roman numerals required the assistance of a counting board or the Roman abacus to obtain the results.\n\nEarly number systems that included positional notation were not decimal, including the sexagesimal (base 60) system for Babylonian numerals and the vigesimal (base 20) system that defined Maya numerals. Because of this place-value concept, the ability to reuse the same digits for different values contributed to simpler and more efficient methods of calculation.\n\nThe continuous historical development of modern arithmetic starts with the Hellenistic civilization of ancient Greece, although it originated much later than the Babylonian and Egyptian examples. Prior to the works of Euclid around 300 BC, Greek studies in mathematics overlapped with philosophical and mystical beliefs. For example, Nicomachus summarized the viewpoint of the earlier Pythagorean approach to numbers, and their relationships to each other, in his \"Introduction to Arithmetic\".\n\nGreek numerals were used by Archimedes, Diophantus and others in a positional notation not very different from ours. Because the ancient Greeks lacked a symbol for zero (until the Hellenistic period), they used three separate sets of symbols. One set for the unit's place, one for the ten's place, and one for the hundred's. Then for the thousand's place they would reuse the symbols for the unit's place, and so on. Their addition algorithm was identical to ours, and their multiplication algorithm was only very slightly different. Their long division algorithm was the same, and the square root algorithm that was once taught in school was known to Archimedes, who may have invented it. He preferred it to Hero's method of successive approximation because, once computed, a digit doesn't change, and the square roots of perfect squares, such as 7485696, terminate immediately as 2736. For numbers with a fractional part, such as 546.934, they used negative powers of 60 instead of negative powers of 10 for the fractional part 0.934. The ancient Chinese used a similar positional notation. Because they also lacked a symbol for zero, they had one set of symbols for the unit's place, and a second set for the ten's place. For the hundred's place they then reused the symbols for the unit's place, and so on. Their symbols were based on the ancient counting rods. It is a complicated question to determine exactly when the Chinese started calculating with positional representation, but it was definitely before 400 BC. The Bishop of Syria, Severus Sebokht (650 AD), \"Indians possess a method of calculation that no word can praise enough. Their rational system of mathematics, or of their method of calculation. I mean the system using nine symbols.\"\n\nLeonardo of Pisa (Fibonacci) in 1200 AD wrote in \"Liber Abaci\" \"The method of the Indians (Modus Indoram) surpasses any known method to compute. It's a marvelous method. They do their computations using nine figures and symbol zero\".\n\nThe gradual development of Hindu–Arabic numerals independently devised the place-value concept and positional notation, which combined the simpler methods for computations with a decimal base and the use of a digit representing 0. This allowed the system to consistently represent both large and small integers. This approach eventually replaced all other systems. In the early the Indian mathematician Aryabhata incorporated an existing version of this system in his work, and experimented with different notations. In the 7th century, Brahmagupta established the use of 0 as a separate number and determined the results for multiplication, division, addition and subtraction of zero and all other numbers, except for the result of division by 0. His contemporary, the Syriac bishop Severus Sebokht described the excellence of this system as \"... valuable methods of calculation which surpass description\". The Arabs also learned this new method and called it \"hesab\".\nAlthough the Codex Vigilanus described an early form of Arabic numerals (omitting 0) by 976 AD, Fibonacci was primarily responsible for spreading their use throughout Europe after the publication of his book \"Liber Abaci\" in 1202. He considered the significance of this \"new\" representation of numbers, which he styled the \"Method of the Indians\" (Latin \"Modus Indorum\"), so fundamental that all related mathematical foundations, including the results of Pythagoras and the algorism describing the methods for performing actual calculations, were \"almost a mistake\" in comparison.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, arithmetic was one of the seven liberal arts taught in universities.\n\nThe flourishing of algebra in the medieval Islamic world and in Renaissance Europe was an outgrowth of the enormous simplification of computation through decimal notation.\n\nVarious types of tools have been invented and widely used to assist in numeric calculations. Before Renaissance, they were various types of abaci. More recent examples include slide rules, nomograms and mechanical calculators, such as Pascal's calculator. At present, they have been supplanted by electronic calculators and computers.\n\nThe basic arithmetic operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, although this subject also includes more advanced operations, such as manipulations of percentages, square roots, exponentiation, and logarithmic functions. Arithmetic is performed according to an order of operations. Any set of objects upon which all four arithmetic operations (except division by 0) can be performed, and where these four operations obey the usual laws, is called a field.\n\nAddition is the basic operation of arithmetic. In its simplest form, addition combines two numbers, the \"addends\" or \"terms\", into a single number, the \"sum\" of the numbers (Such as or ).\n\nAdding more than two numbers can be viewed as repeated addition; this procedure is known as summation and includes ways to add infinitely many numbers in an infinite series; repeated addition of the number 1 is the most basic form of counting.\n\nAddition is commutative and associative so the order the terms are added in does not matter. The identity element of addition (the additive identity) is 0, that is, adding 0 to any number yields that same number. Also, the inverse element of addition (the additive inverse) is the opposite of any number, that is, adding the opposite of any number to the number itself yields the additive identity, 0. For example, the opposite of 7 is −7, so .\n\nAddition can be given geometrically as in the following example:\n\nSubtraction is the inverse of addition. Subtraction finds the \"difference\" between two numbers, the \"minuend\" minus the \"subtrahend\". If the minuend is larger than the subtrahend, the difference is positive; if the minuend is smaller than the subtrahend, the difference is negative; if they are equal, the difference is 0.\n\nSubtraction is neither commutative nor associative. For that reason, it is often helpful to look at subtraction as addition of the minuend and the opposite of the subtrahend, that is . When written as a sum, all the properties of addition hold.\n\nThere are several methods for calculating results, some of which are particularly advantageous to machine calculation. For example, digital computers employ the method of two's complement. Of great importance is the counting up method by which change is made. Suppose an amount \"P\" is given to pay the required amount \"Q\", with \"P\" greater than \"Q\". Rather than performing the subtraction and counting out that amount in change, money is counted out starting at \"Q\" and continuing until reaching \"P\". Although the amount counted out must equal the result of the subtraction , the subtraction was never really done and the value of might still be unknown to the change-maker.\n\nMultiplication is the second basic operation of arithmetic. Multiplication also combines two numbers into a single number, the \"product\". The two original numbers are called the \"multiplier\" and the \"multiplicand\", sometimes both simply called \"factors\".\n\nMultiplication may be viewed as a scaling operation. If the numbers are imagined as lying in a line, multiplication by a number, say \"x\", greater than 1 is the same as stretching everything away from 0 uniformly, in such a way that the number 1 itself is stretched to where \"x\" was. Similarly, multiplying by a number less than 1 can be imagined as squeezing towards 0. (Again, in such a way that 1 goes to the multiplicand.)\n\nMultiplication is commutative and associative; further it is distributive over addition and subtraction. The multiplicative identity is 1, that is, multiplying any number by 1 yields that same number. Also, the multiplicative inverse is the reciprocal of any number (except 0; 0 is the only number without a multiplicative inverse), that is, multiplying the reciprocal of any number by the number itself yields the multiplicative identity.\n\nThe product of \"a\" and \"b\" is written as or . When \"a\" or \"b\" are expressions not written simply with digits, it is also written by simple juxtaposition: \"ab\". In computer programming languages and software packages in which one can only use characters normally found on a keyboard, it is often written with an asterisk: \n\nDivision is essentially the inverse of multiplication. Division finds the \"quotient\" of two numbers, the \"dividend\" divided by the \"divisor\". Any dividend divided by 0 is undefined. For distinct positive numbers, if the dividend is larger than the divisor, the quotient is greater than 1, otherwise it is less than 1 (a similar rule applies for negative numbers). The quotient multiplied by the divisor always yields the dividend.\n\nDivision is neither commutative nor associative. As it is helpful to look at subtraction as addition, it is helpful to look at division as multiplication of the dividend times the reciprocal of the divisor, that is When written as a product, it obeys all the properties of multiplication.\n\nDecimal representation refers exclusively, in common use, to the written numeral system employing arabic numerals as the digits for a radix 10 (\"decimal\") positional notation; however, any numeral system based on powers of 10, e.g., Greek, Cyrillic, Roman, or Chinese numerals may conceptually be described as \"decimal notation\" or \"decimal representation\".\n\nModern methods for four fundamental operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) were first devised by Brahmagupta of India. This was known during medieval Europe as \"Modus Indoram\" or Method of the Indians. Positional notation (also known as \"place-value notation\") refers to the representation or encoding of numbers using the same symbol for the different orders of magnitude (e.g., the \"ones place\", \"tens place\", \"hundreds place\") and, with a radix point, using those same symbols to represent fractions (e.g., the \"tenths place\", \"hundredths place\"). For example, 507.36 denotes 5 hundreds (10), plus 0 tens (10), plus 7 units (10), plus 3 tenths (10) plus 6 hundredths (10).\n\nThe concept of 0 as a number comparable to the other basic digits is essential to this notation, as is the concept of 0's use as a placeholder, and as is the definition of multiplication and addition with 0. The use of 0 as a placeholder and, therefore, the use of a positional notation is first attested to in the Jain text from India entitled the \"Lokavibhâga\", dated 458 AD and it was only in the early 13th century that these concepts, transmitted via the scholarship of the Arabic world, were introduced into Europe by Fibonacci using the Hindu–Arabic numeral system.\n\nAlgorism comprises all of the rules for performing arithmetic computations using this type of written numeral. For example, addition produces the sum of two arbitrary numbers. The result is calculated by the repeated addition of single digits from each number that occupies the same position, proceeding from right to left. An addition table with ten rows and ten columns displays all possible values for each sum. If an individual sum exceeds the value 9, the result is represented with two digits. The rightmost digit is the value for the current position, and the result for the subsequent addition of the digits to the left increases by the value of the second (leftmost) digit, which is always one. This adjustment is termed a \"carry\" of the value 1.\n\nThe process for multiplying two arbitrary numbers is similar to the process for addition. A multiplication table with ten rows and ten columns lists the results for each pair of digits. If an individual product of a pair of digits exceeds 9, the \"carry\" adjustment increases the result of any subsequent multiplication from digits to the left by a value equal to the second (leftmost) digit, which is any value from (). Additional steps define the final result.\n\nSimilar techniques exist for subtraction and division.\n\nThe creation of a correct process for multiplication relies on the relationship between values of adjacent digits. The value for any single digit in a numeral depends on its position. Also, each position to the left represents a value ten times larger than the position to the right. In mathematical terms, the exponent for the radix (base) of 10 increases by 1 (to the left) or decreases by 1 (to the right). Therefore, the value for any arbitrary digit is multiplied by a value of the form 10 with integer \"n\". The list of values corresponding to all possible positions for a single digit is written \n\nRepeated multiplication of any value in this list by 10 produces another value in the list. In mathematical terminology, this characteristic is defined as closure, and the previous list is described as closed under multiplication. It is the basis for correctly finding the results of multiplication using the previous technique. This outcome is one example of the uses of number theory.\n\nCompound unit arithmetic is the application of arithmetic operations to mixed radix quantities such as feet and inches, gallons and pints, pounds shillings and pence, and so on. Prior to the use of decimal-based systems of money and units of measure, the use of compound unit arithmetic formed a significant part of commerce and industry.\n\nThe techniques used for compound unit arithmetic were developed over many centuries and are well-documented in many textbooks in many different languages. In addition to the basic arithmetic functions encountered in decimal arithmetic, compound unit arithmetic employs three more functions:\n\nKnowledge of the relationship between the various units of measure, their multiples and their submultiples forms an essential part of compound unit arithmetic.\n\nThere are two basic approaches to compound unit arithmetic:\n\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries various aids were developed to aid the manipulation of compound units, particularly in commercial applications. The most common aids were mechanical tills which were adapted in countries such as the United Kingdom to accommodate pounds, shillings, pennies and farthings and \"Ready Reckoners\" – books aimed at traders that catalogued the results of various routine calculations such as the percentages or multiples of various sums of money. One typical booklet that ran to 150 pages tabulated multiples \"from one to ten thousand at the various prices from one farthing to one pound\".\n\nThe cumbersome nature of compound unit arithmetic has been recognized for many years – in 1586, the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin published a small pamphlet called \"De Thiende\" (\"the tenth\") in which he declared that the universal introduction of decimal coinage, measures, and weights to be merely a question of time while in the modern era, many conversion programs, such as that embedded in the calculator supplied as a standard part of the Microsoft Windows 7 operating system display compound units in a reduced decimal format rather than using an expanded format (i.e. \"2.5 ft\" is displayed rather than ).\n\nUntil the 19th century, \"number theory\" was a synonym of \"arithmetic\". The addressed problems were directly related to the basic operations and concerned primality, divisibility, and the solution of equations in integers, such as Fermat's last theorem. It appeared that most of these problems, although very elementary to state, are very difficult and may not be solved without very deep mathematics involving concepts and methods from many other branches of mathematics. This led to new branches of number theory such as analytic number theory, algebraic number theory, Diophantine geometry and arithmetic algebraic geometry. Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is a typical example of the necessity of sophisticated methods, which go far beyond the classical methods of arithmetic, for solving problems that can be stated in elementary arithmetic.\n\nPrimary education in mathematics often places a strong focus on algorithms for the arithmetic of natural numbers, integers, fractions, and decimals (using the decimal place-value system). This study is sometimes known as algorism.\n\nThe difficulty and unmotivated appearance of these algorithms has long led educators to question this curriculum, advocating the early teaching of more central and intuitive mathematical ideas. One notable movement in this direction was the New Math of the 1960s and 1970s, which attempted to teach arithmetic in the spirit of axiomatic development from set theory, an echo of the prevailing trend in higher mathematics.\n\nAlso, arithmetic was used by Islamic Scholars in order to teach application of the rulings related to Zakat and Irth. This was done in a book entitled \"The Best of Arithmetic\" by Abd-al-Fattah-al-Dumyati.\n\nThe book begins with the foundations of mathematics and proceeds to its application in the later chapters.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3120", "title": "Andersonville, Georgia", "text": "Andersonville, Georgia\n\nAndersonville is a city in Sumter County, Georgia, United States. As of the 2010 census, the city had a population of 255. It is located in the southwest part of the state, approximately southwest of Macon on the Central of Georgia railroad. During the American Civil War, it was the site of a prisoner-of-war camp, which is now Andersonville National Historic Site.\n\nAndersonville is part of the Americus Micropolitan Statistical Area.\n\nThe little hamlet of Anderson was named for John Anderson, a director of the South Western Railroad in 1853 when it was extended from Oglethorpe to Americus. It was known as Anderson Station until the US post office was established in November 1855. The government changed the name of the station from “Anderson” to “Andersonville” in order to avoid confusion with the post office in Anderson, South Carolina.\n\nDuring the Civil War, the Confederate army established Camp Sumter at Andersonville to house incoming Union prisoners of war. The overcrowded Andersonville Prison was notorious for its bad conditions, and nearly 13,000 prisoners died there.\n\nThe town also served as a supply depot during the war period. It included a post office, a depot, a blacksmith shop and stable, a couple of general stores, two saloons, a school, a Methodist church, and about a dozen houses. (Ben Dykes, who owned the land on which the prison was built, was both depot agent and postmaster.)\n\nUntil the establishment of the prison, the area was entirely dependent on agriculture, supported by dark reddish brown sandy loams later mapped as Greenville and Red Bay soil series. After the close of the prison and end of the war, the town continued economically dependent on agriculture, primarily the cultivation of cotton as a commodity crop. The town changed very little over the years.\n\nIt was not until 1968, when the large-scale mining of kaolin, bauxitic kaolin, and bauxite was begun by Mulcoa, Mullite Company of America, that the town was dramatically altered. This operation exploited of scrub oak wilderness into a massive mining and refining operation. The company now ships more than 2000 tons of refined ore from Andersonville each week.\n\nIn 1974, long-time mayor Lewis Easterlin and a group of concerned citizens decided to promote tourism in the town; they stressed its history, redeveloping Main Street to look much as it did during the American Civil War. The city of Andersonville and the Andersonville National Historic Site, location of the prison camp, welcomes tourists from all over the world.\n\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 331 people, 124 households, and 86 families residing in the city. The population density was 254.1 people per square mile (98.3/km²). There were 142 housing units at an average density of 109.0 per square mile (42.2/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 65.26% White and 34.74% African American. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.21% of the population.\n\nThere were 124 households out of which 34.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.0% were married couples living together, 17.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.6% were non-families. 26.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.21.\n\nIn the city, the population was spread out with 27.8% under the age of 18, 9.4% from 18 to 24, 31.4% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 105.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.5 males.\n\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,107, and the median income for a family was $30,972. Males had a median income of $26,591 versus $20,000 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,168. About 19.8% of families and 23.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.3% of those under age 18 and 13.5% of those age 65 or over.\n\n"}
{"id": "3121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3121", "title": "Andersonville", "text": "Andersonville\n\nAndersonville may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3122", "title": "Agra Canal", "text": "Agra Canal\n\nThe Agra Canal is an important Indian irrigation work which starts from Okhla in Delhi. The Agra canal originates from Okhla barrage, downstream of Nizamuddin bridge. It opened in 1874..\n\nIn the beginning, it was available for navigation, in Delhi, erstwhile Gurgaon, Mathura and Agra Districts, and Bharatpur State. Later, navigation was stopped in 1904 and the canal has since then, been exclusively used for irrigation purposes only. At present the canal does not flow in district Gurgaon, but only in Faridabad, which was earlier a part of Gurgaon.\n\nThe Canal receives its water from the Yamuna River at Okhla, about 10 km to the south of New Delhi. The weir across the Yamuna was the first attempted in Upper India upon a foundation of fine sand; it is about 800-yard long, and rises seven-feet above the summer level of the river.\n\nFrom Okhla the canal follows the high land between the Khari-Nadi and the Yamuna and finally joins the Banganga river about below Agra. Navigable branches connect the canal with Mathura and Agra.\nthe canal irrigates about 1.5 lakh hectares in Agra, and Mathura in Uttar Pradesh, Faridabad in Haryana, Bharatpur in Rajasthan and also some parts of Delhi\n\nThe Agra Canal also has many places to visit along its coast.\n"}
{"id": "3123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3123", "title": "Amakusa", "text": "Amakusa\n\nAmakusa (天草), which means \"Heaven's Grass,\" is a series of islands off the west coast of Kyushu, the southernmost of the four main islands of Japan.\n\nThe largest island of the Amakusa group is Shimoshima, which is 26.5 miles long and 13.5 miles in extreme width (). It is situated at 32°20'N, 130°E, separated from the rest of Kumamoto Prefecture by the Yatsushiro Sea.\n\nIt has no high mountains, but its surface is very hilly. Four of the peaks rise to a height of over . The population resorts to the terrace system of cultivation to cope with the lack of flat arable land.\n\nAmakusa, along with the neighboring Shimabara Peninsula, became the site of the Shimabara rebellion in the 17th century, led by Christians. Following the rebellion, Kakure Kirishitan, the Christians who had survived, continued to practice their faith in secret, despite massive persecution.\n\nAmakusa produces a little coal and pottery stone, both being used by the potters of Hirado and Satsuma Province. Many kilns remain on the islands today, and pottery and pottery stone are still exported.\n\nAmakusa pottery has been recognised by the government. The retail company Muji brought out its own line of \"Hakuji\" home ware, which is produced out of ground translucent Amakusa stones kneaded into clay, using traditional techniques.\n\nHidenoshin Koyama, who built Thomas Blake Glover's House in Glover Garden, came from this island.\n\nAt present, the islands are organized as Amakusa District, Amakusa City, and Kami-amakusa City, all of which are under the administration of Kumamoto Prefecture.\n\nThe islands are served by Amakusa Airfield, located on the north end of Shimoshima. The islands are connected to the mainland by the Five Bridges of Amakusa and by ferry from Hondo and Matsushima.\n\nThere are also ferries between the islands and the neighboring prefectures of Kagoshima Prefecture and Nagasaki Prefecture. The ferry from Oniike on the north Shimoshima to Kuchinotsu, at the southern tip of the Shimabara Peninsula, is run by the Shimabara Railway and operates hourly each day. The ferry boat from Tomioka Port in Reihoku, sailing north to Mogi in Nagasaki Prefecture, is operated by Yasuda Sangyo Kisen Co. Ltd.\nTwo ferries from Shinwa and Ushibuka, in the south of Shimoshima, connect Amakusa to Nagashima in Kagoshima Prefecture.\n"}
{"id": "3124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3124", "title": "Afterglow", "text": "Afterglow\n\nAn afterglow is a broad arch of whitish or pinkish sunlight in the sky that is scattered by fine particulates like dust suspended in the atmosphere. An afterglow may appear above the highest clouds in the hour of fading twilight, or be reflected off high snowfields in mountain regions long after sunset. The particles produce a scattering effect upon the component parts of white light.\n\nTrue alpenglow, which occurs long after sunset or long before sunrise, is caused by the backscattering of red sunlight by aerosols and fine dust particles low in the atmosphere. After sunset, alpenglow is an afterglow caused by the illumination of atmospheric particles by sunlight as it gets refracted and scattered through the Earth's atmosphere.\n\nThe high-energy and high-frequency light is scattered out the most, while the remaining low-energy and -frequency light reaches the observer on the horizon at twilight. The backscattering of this light further turns it pinkish to reddish. This period of time is referred to as blue hour and is widely treasured by photographers and painters, as it offers breathtaking views.\n\nThe afterglow persists until the Earth's shadow (terminator line) overtakes the sky above the observer as night falls and the stars appear, with Venus (the second-brightest celestial object after the Moon in the night sky) visible above the horizon opposite of the Belt of Venus around the antisolar point.\n\nAfter the 1883 eruption of the volcano Krakatoa, a remarkable series of red sunsets appeared worldwide. An enormous amount of exceedingly fine dust were blown to a great height by the volcano's explosion, and then globally diffused by the high atmospheric winds. Edvard Munch's painting \"The Scream\" possibly depicts an afterglow during this period.\n\n"}
{"id": "3125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3125", "title": "Ammonius Grammaticus", "text": "Ammonius Grammaticus\n\nAmmonius Grammaticus was a 4th-century Egyptian priest who, after the destruction of the pagan temple at Alexandria (389), fled to Constantinople, where he became the tutor of the ecclesiastical historian Socrates.\n\nAmmonius was formerly identified as the author of a treatise titled \"Peri homoíōn kai diaphórōn léxeōn\" (περὶ ὁμοίων καὶ διαφόρων λέξεων, \"On the Differences of Synonymous Expressions\").\nBut it seems more probable that the real author was Herennius Philo of Byblus, who was born during the reign of Nero and lived till the reign of Hadrian, and that the treatise in its present form is a revision prepared by a later Byzantine editor, whose name may have been Ammonius.\n\nAttribution:\n"}
{"id": "3129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3129", "title": "Algebraic closure", "text": "Algebraic closure\n\nIn mathematics, particularly abstract algebra, an algebraic closure of a field \"K\" is an algebraic extension of \"K\" that is algebraically closed. It is one of many closures in mathematics.\n\nUsing Zorn's lemma or the weaker ultrafilter lemma, it can be shown that every field has an algebraic closure, and that the algebraic closure of a field \"K\" is unique up to an isomorphism that fixes every member of \"K\". Because of this essential uniqueness, we often speak of \"the\" algebraic closure of \"K\", rather than \"an\" algebraic closure of \"K\".\n\nThe algebraic closure of a field \"K\" can be thought of as the largest algebraic extension of \"K\".\nTo see this, note that if \"L\" is any algebraic extension of \"K\", then the algebraic closure of \"L\" is also an algebraic closure of \"K\", and so \"L\" is contained within the algebraic closure of \"K\".\nThe algebraic closure of \"K\" is also the smallest algebraically closed field containing \"K\",\nbecause if \"M\" is any algebraically closed field containing \"K\", then the elements of \"M\" that are algebraic over \"K\" form an algebraic closure of \"K\".\n\nThe algebraic closure of a field \"K\" has the same cardinality as \"K\" if \"K\" is infinite, and is countably infinite if \"K\" is finite.\n\n\nLet formula_1 be the set of all monic irreducible polynomials in \"K\"[\"x\"].\nFor each formula_2, introduce new variables formula_3 where formula_4.\nLet \"R\" be the polynomial ring over \"K\" generated by formula_5 for all formula_6 and all formula_7. Write\n\nwith formula_9.\nLet \"I\" be the ideal in \"R\" generated by the formula_10. Since \"I\" is strictly smaller than \"R\",\nZorn's lemma implies that there exists a maximal ideal \"M\" in \"R\" that contains \"I\".\nThe field \"K\"=\"R\"/\"M\" has the property that every polynomial formula_11 with coefficients in \"K\" splits as the product of formula_12 and hence has all roots in \"K\". In the same way, an extension \"K\" of \"K\" can be constructed, etc. The union of all these extensions is the algebraic closure of \"K\", because any polynomial with coefficients in this new field has its coefficients in some \"K\" with sufficiently large \"n\", and then its roots are in \"K\", and hence in the union itself. \n\nIt can be shown along the same lines that for any subset \"S\" of \"K\"[\"x\"], there exists a splitting field of \"S\" over \"K\".\n\nAn algebraic closure \"K\" of \"K\" contains a unique separable extension \"K\" of \"K\" containing all (algebraic) separable extensions of \"K\" within \"K\". This subextension is called a separable closure of \"K\". Since a separable extension of a separable extension is again separable, there are no finite separable extensions of \"K\", of degree > 1. Saying this another way, \"K\" is contained in a \"separably-closed\" algebraic extension field. It is unique (up to isomorphism).\n\nThe separable closure is the full algebraic closure if and only if \"K\" is a perfect field. For example, if \"K\" is a field of characteristic \"p\" and if \"X\" is transcendental over \"K\", formula_13 is a non-separable algebraic field extension.\n\nIn general, the absolute Galois group of \"K\" is the Galois group of \"K\" over \"K\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3130", "title": "Advanced Power Management", "text": "Advanced Power Management\n\nAdvanced power management (APM) is an API developed by Intel and Microsoft and released in 1992 which enables an operating system running an IBM-compatible personal computer to work with the BIOS (part of the computer's firmware) to achieve power management.\n\nRevision 1.2 was the last version of the APM specification, released in 1996. ACPI is intended as the successor to APM. Microsoft dropped support for APM in Windows Vista. The Linux kernel still mostly supports APM, with the last fully functional APM support shipping in 3.3.\n\nAPM uses a layered approach to manage devices. APM-aware applications (which include device drivers) talk to an OS-specific APM driver. This driver communicates to the APM-aware BIOS, which controls the hardware. There is the ability to opt out of APM control on a device-by-device basis, which can be used if a driver wants to communicate directly with a hardware device.\n\nCommunication occurs both ways; power management events are sent from the BIOS to the APM driver, and the APM driver sends information and requests to the BIOS via function calls. In this way the APM driver is an intermediary between the BIOS and the operating system.\n\nPower management happens in two ways; through the above-mentioned function calls from the APM driver to the BIOS requesting power state changes, and automatically based on device activity.\n\nThere are 12 power events (such as standby, suspend and resume requests, and low battery notifications), plus OEM-defined events, that can be sent from the APM BIOS to the operating system. The APM driver regularly polls for event change notifications.\n\nPower Management Events:\nPower management functions:\nThere are 21 APM function calls defined that the APM driver can use to query power management statuses, or request power state transitions. Example function calls include letting the BIOS know about current CPU usage (the BIOS may respond to such a call by placing the CPU in a low-power state, or returning it to its full-power state), retrieving the current power state of a device, or requesting a power state change.\n\nThe APM specification defines system power states and device power states.\n\nAPM defines five power states for the computer system:\n\nAPM also defines power states that APM-aware hardware can implement. There is no requirement that an APM-aware device implement all states.\n\nThe four states are:\n\nThe CPU core (defined in APM as the CPU clock, cache, system bus and system timers) is treated specially in APM, as it is the last device to be powered down, and the first device to be powered back up. The CPU core is always controlled through the APM BIOS (there is no option to control it through a driver). Drivers can use APM function calls to notify the BIOS about CPU usage, but it is up to the BIOS to act on this information; a driver cannot directly tell the CPU to go into a power saving state.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3132", "title": "Adolphe Sax", "text": "Adolphe Sax\n\nAntoine-Joseph \"Adolphe\" Sax (; 6 November 1814 – c. 7 February 1894) was a Belgian inventor and musician who invented the saxophone in the early 1840s (patented in 1846). He played the flute and clarinet. He also invented the saxotromba, saxhorn and saxtuba.\n\nAntoine-Joseph Sax was born on 6 November 1814, in Dinant, in what is now Belgium, to Charles-Joseph Sax and his wife. While his given name was Antoine, he was referred to as Adolphe from childhood. His father and mother were instrument designers themselves, who made several changes to the design of the French horn. Adolphe began to make his own instruments at an early age, entering two of his flutes and a clarinet into a competition at the age of 15. He subsequently studied performance on those two instruments as well as voice at the Royal Conservatory of Brussels.\n\nSax faced many near-death experiences. Over the course of his childhood, he:\n\n\nHis mother once said that \"he's a child condemned to misfortune; he won't live.\" His neighbors called him \"little Sax, the ghost\".\n\nAfter leaving the Royal Conservatory of Brussels, Sax began to experiment with new instrument designs, while his parents continued to make conventional instruments to bring in money. Adolphe's first important invention was an improvement of the bass clarinet design, which he patented at the age of 24. Sax relocated permanently to Paris in 1841 and began working on a new set of instruments which he exhibited there in 1844. These were valved bugles, and although he had not invented the instrument itself, his examples were much more successful than those of his rivals and became known as saxhorns. They came in seven different sizes, and paved the way for the creation of the flugelhorn. Today, saxhorns are sometimes used in concert bands and orchestras. The saxhorn also laid the groundwork for the modern euphonium.\n\nSax also developed the \"saxotromba\" family, valved brass instruments with narrower bore than the saxhorns, in 1845, though they survived only briefly.\n\nThe use of saxhorns spread rapidly. The saxhorn valves were accepted as state-of-the-art in their time and remain largely unchanged today. The advances made by Adolphe Sax were soon followed by the British brass band movement which exclusively adopted the saxhorn family of instruments. The Jedforest Instrumental Band formed in 1854 and The Hawick Saxhorn Band formed in 1855, within the Scottish Borders, a decade after saxhorn models became available.\n\nThe period around 1840 saw Sax inventing the \"clarinette-bourdon\", an early unsuccessful design of contrabass clarinet. Around this time he also developed the instrument for which he is best known: the saxophone which he patented on 28 June 1846. The saxophone was invented for use in both orchestras and military bands. By 1846 Sax had designed (on paper at least) a full range of saxophones (from sopranino to subcontrabass). Composer Hector Berlioz wrote approvingly of the new instrument in 1842, but despite his support, saxophones never became standard orchestral instruments. However, their ability to play technical passages easily like woodwinds and also project loudly like brass instruments led them to be included in military bands in France and elsewhere. The saxophone was Sax's signature accomplishment and created his reputation more than any other. This helped secure him a job teaching at the Paris Conservatory in 1857.\n\nSax continued to make instruments later in life and presided over the new saxophone program at the Paris Conservatory. Rival instrument makers both attacked the legitimacy of his patents and were sued by Sax for patent infringement. The legal back-and-forth continued for over 20 years. He was driven into bankruptcy twice: in 1856 and again in 1873.\n\nSax suffered from lip cancer between 1853 and 1858 but made a full recovery. In 1894 Sax died in complete poverty in Paris and was interred in section 5 (Avenue de Montebello) at the Cimetière de Montmartre in Paris.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3134", "title": "Aspirated consonant", "text": "Aspirated consonant\n\nIn phonetics, aspiration is the strong burst of breath that accompanies either the release or, in the case of preaspiration, the closure of some obstruents. In English, aspirated consonants are allophones in complementary distribution with their unaspirated counterparts, but in some other languages, notably most Indian and East Asian languages, the difference is contrastive, while in Arabic and Persian, all stops are aspirated.\n\nTo feel or see the difference between aspirated and unaspirated sounds, one can put a hand or a lit candle in front of one's mouth, and say \"spin\" and then \"pin\" . One should either feel a puff of air or see a flicker of the candle flame with \"pin\" that one does not get with \"spin\".\n\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), aspirated consonants are written using the symbols for voiceless consonants followed by the aspiration modifier letter , a superscript form of the symbol for the voiceless glottal fricative . For instance, represents the voiceless bilabial stop, and represents the aspirated bilabial stop.\n\nVoiced consonants are seldom actually aspirated. Symbols for voiced consonants followed by , such as , typically represent consonants with murmured voiced release (see below). In the grammatical tradition of Sanskrit, aspirated consonants are called voiceless aspirated, and breathy-voiced consonants are called voiced aspirated.\n\nThere are no dedicated IPA symbols for degrees of aspiration and typically only two degrees are marked: unaspirated and aspirated . An old symbol for light aspiration was , but this is now obsolete. The aspiration modifier letter may be doubled to indicate especially strong or long aspiration. Hence, the two degrees of aspiration in Korean stops are sometimes transcribed or and , but they are usually transcribed and , with the details of voice-onset time given numerically.\n\nPreaspirated consonants are marked by placing the aspiration modifier letter before the consonant symbol: represents the preaspirated bilabial stop.\n\nUnaspirated or tenuis consonants are occasionally marked with the modifier letter for unaspiration , a superscript equals sign: . Usually, however, unaspirated consonants are left unmarked: .\n\nVoiceless consonants are produced with the vocal folds open (spread) and not vibrating, and voiced consonants are produced when the vocal folds are fractionally closed and vibrating (modal voice). Voiceless aspiration occurs when the vocal cords remain open after a consonant is released. An easy way to measure this is by noting the consonant's voice-onset time, as the voicing of a following vowel cannot begin until the vocal cords close.\n\nPhonetically in some languages, such as Navajo, aspiration of stops tends to be realised as voiceless velar airflow; aspiration of affricates is realised as an extended length of the frication.\n\nAspirated consonants are not always followed by vowels or other voiced sounds. For example, in Eastern Armenian, aspiration is contrastive even word-finally, and aspirated consonants occur in consonant clusters. In Wahgi, consonants are aspirated only in final position.\n\nThe degree of aspiration varies: the voice-onset time of aspirated stops is longer or shorter depending on the language or the place of articulation.\n\nArmenian and Cantonese have aspiration that lasts about as long as English aspirated stops, in addition to unaspirated stops. Korean has lightly aspirated stops that fall between the Armenian and Cantonese unaspirated and aspirated stops as well as strongly aspirated stops whose aspiration lasts longer than that of Armenian or Cantonese. (See voice-onset time.)\n\nAspiration varies with place of articulation. The Spanish voiceless stops have voice-onset times (VOTs) of about 5, 10, and 30 milliseconds, whereas English aspirated have VOTs of about 60, 70, and 80 ms. Voice-onset time in Korean has been measured at 20, 25, and 50 ms for and 90, 95, and 125 for .\n\nWhen aspirated consonants are doubled or geminated, the stop is held longer and then has an aspirated release. An aspirated affricate consists of a stop, fricative, and aspirated release. A doubled aspirated affricate has a longer hold in the stop portion and then has a release consisting of the fricative and aspiration.\n\nIcelandic and Faroese have consonants with preaspiration , and some scholars interpret them as consonant clusters as well. In Icelandic, preaspirated stops contrast with double stops and single stops (see :\n\nPreaspirated stops also occur in most Sami languages. For example, in Northern Sami, the unvoiced stop and affricate phonemes , , , , are pronounced preaspirated (, , , ) in medial or final position.\n\nAlthough most aspirated obstruents in the world's languages are stops and affricates, aspirated fricatives such as , or have been documented in Korean, in a few Tibeto-Burman languages, in some Oto-Manguean languages, and in the Siouan language Ofo. Some languages, such as Choni Tibetan, have up to four contrastive aspirated fricatives , and .\n\nTrue aspirated voiced consonants, as opposed to murmured (breathy-voice) consonants such as the that are common in the languages of India, are extremely rare. They have been documented in Kelabit Taa, and the Kx'a languages. Reported aspirated voiced stops, affricates and clicks are .\n\nAspiration has varying significance in different languages. It is either allophonic or phonemic, and may be analyzed as an underlying consonant cluster.\n\nIn some languages, such as English, aspiration is allophonic. Stops are distinguished primarily by voicing, and voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated, while voiced stops are usually unaspirated.\n\nEnglish voiceless stops are aspirated for most native speakers when they are word-initial or begin a stressed syllable, as in \"pill\", \"till\", \"kill\".\n\nThey are unaspirated for almost all speakers when immediately following word-initial s, as in \"spill\", \"still\", \"skill\". After an \"s\" elsewhere in a word they are normally unaspirated as well, except sometimes in compound words. When the consonants in a cluster like \"st\" are analyzed as belonging to different morphemes (heteromorphemic) the stop is aspirated, but when they are analyzed as belonging to one morpheme the stop is unaspirated. For instance, \"distend\" has unaspirated since it is not analyzed as two morphemes, but \"distaste\" has an aspirated middle because it is analyzed as \"dis-\" + \"taste\" and the word \"taste\" has an aspirated initial \"t\".\n\nWord-final voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated.\n\nVoiceless stops in Pashto are slightly aspirated prevocalically in a stressed syllable.\n\nIn many languages, such as Armenian, Korean, Thai, Indo-Aryan languages, Dravidian languages, Icelandic, Ancient Greek, and the varieties of Chinese, tenuis and aspirated consonants are phonemic. Unaspirated consonants like and aspirated consonants like are separate phonemes, and words are distinguished by whether they have one or the other.\n\nAlemannic German dialects have unaspirated as well as aspirated ; the latter series are usually viewed as consonant clusters.\n\nIn Danish and most southern varieties of German, the lenis consonants transcribed for historical reasons as are distinguished from their fortis counterparts , mainly in their lack of aspiration.\n\nFrench, Standard Dutch, Tamil, Italian, Russian, Spanish, Modern Greek, and Latvian are languages that do not have phonemic aspirated consonants.\n\nStandard Chinese (Mandarin) has stops and affricates distinguished by aspiration: for instance, , . In pinyin, tenuis stops are written with letters that represent voiced consonants in English, and aspirated stops with letters that represent voiceless consonants. Thus \"d\" represents , and \"t\" represents .\n\nWu Chinese and Southern Min has a three-way distinction in stops and affricates: . In addition to aspirated and unaspirated consonants, there is a series of \"muddy consonants\", like . These are pronounced with slack or breathy voice: that is, they are weakly voiced. Muddy consonants as initial cause a syllable to be pronounced with low pitch or \"light\" (陽 \"yáng\") tone.\n\nMany Indo-Aryan languages have aspirated stops. Sanskrit, Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, and Gujarati have a four-way distinction in stops: voiceless, aspirated, voiced, and breathy-voiced or voiced aspirated, such as . Punjabi has lost breathy-voiced consonants, which resulted in a tone system, and therefore has a distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced: .\n\nSome of the Dravidian languages, such as Telugu, Tamil, Malayalam, and Kannada, have a distinction between voiced and voiceless, aspirated and unaspirated only in loanwords from Indo-Aryan languages. In native Dravidian words, there is no distinction between these categories and stops are underspecified for voicing and aspiration.\n\nMost dialects of Armenian have aspirated stops, and some have breathy-voiced stops.\n\nClassical and Eastern Armenian have a three-way distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced, such as .\n\nWestern Armenian has a two-way distinction between aspirated and voiced: . Western Armenian aspirated corresponds to Eastern Armenian aspirated and voiced , and Western voiced corresponds to Eastern voiceless .\n\nSome forms of Greek before the Koine Greek period are reconstructed as having aspirated stops. The Classical Attic dialect of Ancient Greek had a three-way distinction in stops like Eastern Armenian: . These series were called , , (\"psilá, daséa, mésa\") \"smooth, rough, intermediate\", respectively, by Koine Greek grammarians.\n\nThere were aspirated stops at three places of articulation: labial, coronal, and velar . Earlier Greek, represented by Mycenaean Greek, likely had a labialized velar aspirated stop , which later became labial, coronal, or velar depending on dialect and phonetic environment.\n\nThe other Ancient Greek dialects, Ionic, Doric, Aeolic, and Arcadocypriot, likely had the same three-way distinction at one point, but Doric seems to have had a fricative in place of in the Classical period, and the Ionic and Aeolic dialects sometimes lost aspiration (psilosis).\n\nLater, during the Koine Greek period, the aspirated and voiced stops of Attic Greek lenited to voiceless and voiced fricatives, yielding in Medieval and Modern Greek.\n\nThe term \"aspiration\" sometimes refers to the sound change of debuccalization, in which a consonant is lenited (weakened) to become a glottal stop or fricative .\n\nSo-called voiced aspirated consonants are nearly always pronounced instead with breathy voice, a type of phonation or vibration of the vocal folds. The modifier letter after a voiced consonant actually represents a breathy-voiced or murmured dental stop, as with the \"voiced aspirated\" bilabial stop in the Indo-Aryan languages. This consonant is therefore more accurately transcribed as , with the diacritic for breathy voice, or with the modifier letter , a superscript form of the symbol for the voiced glottal fricative .\n\nSome linguists restrict the double-dot subscript to murmured sonorants, such as vowels and nasals, which are murmured throughout their duration, and use the superscript hook-aitch for the breathy-voiced release of obstruents.\n\n"}
{"id": "3135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3135", "title": "Arteriovenous malformation", "text": "Arteriovenous malformation\n\nArteriovenous malformation (AVM) is an abnormal connection between arteries and veins, bypassing the capillary system. This vascular anomaly is widely known because of its occurrence in the central nervous system (usually cerebral AVM), but can appear in any location. Although many AVMs are asymptomatic, they can cause intense pain or bleeding or lead to other serious medical problems.\n\nAVMs are usually congenital and belong to the RASopathies.\nThe genetic transmission patterns of AVM, if any, are unknown. AVM is not generally thought to be an inherited disorder, unless in the context of a specific hereditary syndrome.\n\nSymptoms of AVM vary according to the location of the malformation. Roughly 88% of people with an AVM are asymptomatic; often the malformation is discovered as part of an autopsy or during treatment of an unrelated disorder (called in medicine an \"incidental finding\"); in rare cases, its expansion or a micro-bleed from an AVM in the brain can cause epilepsy, neurological deficit, or pain.\n\nThe most general symptoms of a cerebral AVM include headaches and epileptic seizures, with more specific symptoms occurring that normally depend on the location of the malformation and the individual. Such possible symptoms include:\n\n\nCerebral AVMs may present themselves in a number of different ways:\n\n\nIn the lungs, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations have no symptoms in up to 29% of all cases.\n\nCan occur due to autosomal dominant diseases, such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.\n\nArteries and veins are part of the human cardiovascular system. Arteries carry blood away from the heart to the lungs or the rest of the body, where the blood passes through capillaries, and veins return the blood to the heart. An AVM interferes with this process by forming a direct connection of the arteries and veins. AVMs can cause intense pain and lead to serious medical problems. Although AVMs are often associated with the brain and spinal cord, they can develop in any part of the body.\n\nNormally, the arteries in the vascular system carry oxygen-rich blood, except in the case of the pulmonary artery. Structurally, arteries divide and sub-divide repeatedly, eventually forming a sponge-like capillary bed. Blood moves through the capillaries, giving up oxygen and taking up waste products, including , from the surrounding cells. Capillaries in turn successively join together to form veins that carry blood away. The heart acts to pump blood through arteries and uptake the venous blood.\n\nAn AVM lacks the dampening effect of capillaries on the blood flow, which means that the AVM can get progressively larger over time as the amount of blood flowing through it increases, forcing the heart to work harder to keep up with the extra blood flow. It also causes the surrounding area to be deprived of the functions of the capillaries—removal of and delivery of nutrients to the cells. The resulting tangle of blood vessels, often called a \"nidus\" (Latin for \"nest\"), has no capillaries. It can be extremely fragile and prone to bleeding because of the abnormally direct connections between high-pressure arteries and low-pressure veins. The resultant sign, audible via stethoscope, is a rhythmic, whooshing sound caused by excessively rapid blood flow through the arteries and veins. It has been given the term \"bruit\", French for noise. On some occasions, a patient with a brain AVM may become aware of the noise, which can compromise hearing and interfere with sleep in addition to causing psychological distress.\n\nAVMs are diagnosed primarily by the following methods:\n\nAVMs can occur in various parts of the body:\n\nAVMs may occur in isolation or as a part of another disease (for example, Von Hippel-Lindau disease or hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia).\n\nAVMs have been shown to be associated with aortic stenosis.\n\nBleeding from an AVM can be relatively mild or devastating. It can cause severe and less often fatal strokes. If a cerebral AVM is detected before a stroke occurs, usually the arteries feeding blood into the nidus can be closed off to avert the danger. However, interventional therapy may also be relatively risky. \nTreatment for brain AVMs can be symptomatic, and patients should be followed by a neurologist for any seizures, headaches, or focal neurologic deficits. AVM-specific treatment may also involve endovascular embolization, neurosurgery or radiosurgery.\nEmbolization, that is, cutting off the blood supply to the AVM with coils, particles, acrylates, or polymers introduced by a radiographically guided catheter, may be used in addition to neurosurgery or radiosurgery, but is rarely successful in isolation except in smaller AVMs. Gamma knife may also be used.\n\nThe estimated detection rate of AVM in the US general population is 1.4/100,000 per year. This is approximately one fifth to one seventh the incidence of intracranial aneurysms. An estimated 300,000 Americans have AVMs, of whom 12% (approximately 36,000) will exhibit symptoms of greatly varying severity.\n\nEmmanuel, Luschka, and Virchow first described arteriovenous malformations in the mid-1800s. Olivecrona performed the first surgical excision of an intracranial AVM in 1932.\n\n\n\nDespite many years of research, the central question of whether to treat AVMs has not been answered. All treatments, whether involving surgery, radiation, or drugs, have risks and side-effects. Therefore, it might be better in some cases to avoid treatment altogether and simply accept a small risk of coming to harm from the AVM itself. This question is currently being addressed in clinical trials.\n\n"}
{"id": "3138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3138", "title": "Atlanta", "text": "Atlanta\n\nAtlanta is the capital of and the most populous city in the U.S. state of Georgia, with an estimated 2016 population of 472,522. Atlanta is the cultural and economic center of the Atlanta metropolitan area, home to 5,710,795 people and the ninth-largest metropolitan area in the United States. Atlanta is the county seat of Fulton County, and a small portion of the city extends eastward into DeKalb County.\n\nIn 1837, Atlanta was founded at the intersection of two railroad lines, and the city rose from the ashes of the American Civil War to become a national center of commerce. In the decades following the Civil Rights Movement, the city earned a reputation as \"too busy to hate\" for the relatively progressive views of its citizens and leaders compared to other cities in the Deep South. Atlanta attained international prominence, and it became the primary transportation hub of the Southeastern United States, via highway, railroad, and air, with Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport being the world's busiest airport since 1998.\n\nAtlanta rated a \"beta(+)\" world city that exerts a medium impact upon commerce, finance, research, technology, education, media, art, and entertainment. It ranks 40th among world cities and 8th in the nation with a gross domestic product of $270 billion. Atlanta's economy is considered diverse, with dominant sectors that include logistics, professional and business services, media operations, and information technology. Atlanta has topographic features that include rolling hills and dense tree coverage. Revitalization of Atlanta's neighborhoods, initially spurred by the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, has intensified in the 21st century, altering the city's demographics, politics, and culture.\n\nPrior to the arrival of European settlers in north Georgia, Creek Indians inhabited the area. Standing Peachtree, a Creek village located where Peachtree Creek flows into the Chattahoochee River, was the closest Indian settlement to what is now Atlanta. As part of the systematic removal of Native Americans from northern Georgia from 1802 to 1825, the Creek ceded the area in 1821, and white settlers arrived the following year.\n\nIn 1836, the Georgia General Assembly voted to build the Western and Atlantic Railroad in order to provide a link between the port of Savannah and the Midwest. The initial route was to run southward from Chattanooga to a terminus east of the Chattahoochee River, which would then be linked to Savannah. After engineers surveyed various possible locations for the terminus, the \"zero milepost\" was driven into the ground in what is now Five Points. A year later, the area around the milepost had developed into a settlement, first known as \"Terminus,\" and later as \"Thrasherville\" after a local merchant who built homes and a general store in the area. By 1842, the town had six buildings and 30 residents and was renamed \"Marthasville\" to honor the Governor's daughter. Later, J. Edgar Thomson, Chief Engineer of the Georgia Railroad, suggested the town be renamed \"Atlantica-Pacifica,\" which was shortened to \"Atlanta\". The residents approved, and the town was incorporated as Atlanta on December 29, 1847.\n\nBy 1860, Atlanta's population had grown to 9,554. During the American Civil War, the nexus of multiple railroads in Atlanta made the city a hub for the distribution of military supplies. In 1864, the Union Army moved southward following the capture of Chattanooga and began its invasion of north Georgia. The region surrounding Atlanta was the location of several major army battles, culminating with the Battle of Atlanta and a four-month-long siege of the city by the Union Army under the command of General William Tecumseh Sherman. On September 1, 1864, Confederate General John Bell Hood made the decision to retreat from Atlanta, and he ordered the destruction of all public buildings and possible assets that could be of use to the Union Army. On the next day, Mayor James Calhoun surrendered Atlanta to the Union Army, and on September 7, Sherman ordered the city's civilian population to evacuate. On November 11, 1864, Sherman prepared for the Union Army's March to the Sea by ordering Atlanta to be burned to the ground, sparing only the city's churches and hospitals.\n\nAfter the Civil War ended in 1865, Atlanta was gradually rebuilt. Due to the city's superior rail transportation network, the state capital was moved from Milledgeville to Atlanta in 1868. In the 1880 Census, Atlanta surpassed Savannah as Georgia's largest city.\nBeginning in the 1880s, Henry W. Grady, the editor of the \"Atlanta Constitution\" newspaper, promoted Atlanta to potential investors as a city of the \"New South\" that would be based upon a modern economy and less reliant on agriculture. By 1885, the founding of the Georgia School of Technology (now Georgia Tech) and the city's black colleges had established Atlanta as a center for higher education. In 1895, Atlanta hosted the Cotton States and International Exposition, which attracted nearly 800,000 attendees and successfully promoted the New South's development to the world.\n\nDuring the first decades of the 20th century, Atlanta experienced a period of unprecedented growth. In three decades' time, Atlanta's population tripled as the city limits expanded to include nearby streetcar suburbs. The city's skyline emerged with the construction of the Equitable, Flatiron, Empire, and Candler buildings; and Sweet Auburn emerged as a center of black commerce. The period was also marked by strife and tragedy. Increased racial tensions led to the Atlanta Race Riot of 1906, which left at least 27 people dead and over 70 injured. In 1915, Leo Frank, a Jewish-American factory superintendent, convicted of murder, was hanged in Marietta by a lynch mob, drawing attention to antisemitism in the United States. On May 21, 1917, the Great Atlanta Fire destroyed 1,938 buildings in what is now the Old Fourth Ward, resulting in one fatality and the displacement of 10,000 people.\n\nOn December 15, 1939, Atlanta hosted the premiere of \"Gone with the Wind\", the epic film based on the best-selling novel by Atlanta's Margaret Mitchell. The gala event at Loew's Grand Theatre was attended by the film's legendary producer, David O. Selznick, and the film's stars Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, and Olivia de Havilland, but Oscar winner Hattie McDaniel, an African American actress, was barred from the event due to racial segregation laws and policies.\n\nAtlanta played a vital role in the Allied effort during World War II due to the city's war-related manufacturing companies, railroad network and military bases, leading to rapid population and economic growth. In the 1950s, the city's newly constructed highway system allowed middle class Atlantans the ability to relocate to the suburbs. As a result, the city began to make up an ever-smaller proportion of the metropolitan area's population.\n\nDuring the 1960s, Atlanta was a major organizing center of the Civil Rights Movement, with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Ralph David Abernathy, and students from Atlanta's historically black colleges and universities playing major roles in the movement's leadership. While minimal compared to other cities, Atlanta was not free of racial strife. In 1961, the city attempted to thwart blockbusting by erecting road barriers in Cascade Heights, countering the efforts of civic and business leaders to foster Atlanta as the \"city too busy to hate\". Desegregation of the public sphere came in stages, with public transportation desegregated by 1959, the restaurant at Rich's department store by 1961, movie theaters by 1963, and public schools by 1973.\n\nIn 1960, whites comprised 61.7% of the city's population. By 1970, African Americans were a majority of the city's population and exercised new-found political influence by electing Atlanta's first black mayor, Maynard Jackson, in 1973. Under Mayor Jackson's tenure, Atlanta's airport was modernized, solidifying the city's role as a transportation center. The opening of the Georgia World Congress Center in 1976 heralded Atlanta's rise as a convention city. Construction of the city's subway system began in 1975, with rail service commencing in 1979. Despite these improvements, Atlanta lost over 100,000 residents between 1970 and 1990, over 20% of its population.\n\nAtlanta was selected as the site for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games. Following the announcement, the city government undertook several major construction projects to improve Atlanta's parks, sporting venues, and transportation infrastructure. While the games themselves were marred by numerous organizational inefficiencies as well as the Centennial Olympic Park bombing, the spectacle was a watershed event in Atlanta's history that initiated a fundamental transformation of the city in the decade that followed.\n\nDuring the 2000s, Atlanta underwent a profound physical, cultural, and demographic transformation. Suburbanization, a booming economy, and new migrants decreased the city's black percentage from a high of 67% in 1990 to 54% in 2010. From 2000 to 2010, Atlanta gained 22,763 white residents, 5,142 Asian residents, and 3,095 Hispanic residents, while the city's black population decreased by 31,678. Much of the city's demographic change during the decade was driven by young, college-educated professionals: from 2000 to 2009, the three-mile radius surrounding Downtown Atlanta gained 9,722 residents aged 25 to 34 holding at least a four-year degree, an increase of 61%. Between the mid-1990s and 2010, stimulated by funding from the HOPE VI program, Atlanta demolished nearly all of its public housing, a total of 17,000 units and about 10% of all housing units in the city. In 2005, the $2.8 billion BeltLine project was adopted, with the stated goals of converting a disused 22-mile freight railroad loop that surrounds the central city into an art-filled multi-use trail and increasing the city's park space by 40%. Atlanta's cultural offerings expanded during the 2000s: the High Museum of Art doubled in size; the Alliance Theatre won a Tony Award; and art galleries were established on the once-industrial Westside.\n\nAtlanta encompasses , of which is land and is water. The city is situated among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains, and at above mean sea level, Atlanta has one of the highest elevations among major cities east of the Mississippi River. Atlanta straddles the Eastern Continental Divide, such that rainwater that falls on the south and east side of the divide flows into the Atlantic Ocean, while rainwater on the north and west side of the divide flows into the Gulf of Mexico. Atlanta sits atop a ridge south of the Chattahoochee River, which is part of the ACF River Basin. Located at the far northwestern edge of the city, much of the river's natural habitat is preserved, in part by the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area.\n\nMost of Atlanta was burned during the Civil War, depleting the city of a large stock of its historic architecture. Yet architecturally, the city had never been particularly \"southern\"—because Atlanta originated as a railroad town, rather than a patrician southern seaport like Savannah or Charleston, many of the city's landmarks could have easily been erected in the Northeast or Midwest.\n\nDuring the Cold War era, Atlanta embraced global modernist trends, especially regarding commercial and institutional architecture. Examples of modernist architecture include the 1,196,240sq.ft Westin Peachtree Plaza (1976), Georgia-Pacific Tower (1982), the State of Georgia Building (1966), and the Atlanta Marriott Marquis (1985). In the latter half of the 1980s, Atlanta became one of the early adopters of postmodern designs that reintroduced classical elements to the cityscape. Many of Atlanta's tallest skyscrapers were built in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with most displaying tapering spires or otherwise ornamented crowns, such as the 1,187,676 sq.ft One Atlantic Center (1987), 191 Peachtree Tower (1991), and the Four Seasons Hotel Atlanta (1992). Also completed during the era is Atlanta's tallest skyscraper, the Bank of America Plaza (1992), which, at , is the 61st-tallest building in the world and the 9th-tallest building in the United States. The Bank of America Plaza is the tallest building outside of New York City and Chicago, and was the last building built in the United States to be in the top 10 tallest buildings in the world until One World Trade Center was completed externally in May 2013. The city's embrace of modern architecture translated into an ambivalent approach toward historic preservation, leading to the destruction of notable architectural landmarks, including the Equitable Building (1892–1971), Terminal Station (1905–1972), and the Carnegie Library (1902–1977). The Fox Theatre (1929)—Atlanta's cultural icon—would have met the same fate had it not been for a grassroots effort to save it in the mid-1970s.\n\nAtlanta is divided into 242 officially defined neighborhoods. The city contains three major high-rise districts, which form a north-south axis along Peachtree: Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead. Surrounding these high-density districts are leafy, low-density neighborhoods, most of which are dominated by single-family homes.\n\nDowntown Atlanta contains the most office space in the metro area, much of it occupied by government entities. Downtown is home to the city's sporting venues and many of its tourist attractions. Midtown Atlanta is the city's second-largest business district, containing the offices of many of the region's law firms. Midtown is known for its art institutions, cultural attractions, institutions of higher education, and dense form. Buckhead, the city's uptown district, is eight miles (13 km) north of Downtown and the city's third-largest business district. The district is marked by an urbanized core along Peachtree Road, surrounded by suburban single-family neighborhoods situated among dense forests and rolling hills.\n\nSurrounding Atlanta's three high-rise districts are the city's low- and medium-density neighborhoods, where the craftsman bungalow single-family home is dominant. The eastside is marked by historic streetcar suburbs built from the 1890s-1930s as havens for the upper middle class. These neighborhoods, many of which contain their own villages encircled by shaded, architecturally-distinct residential streets, include the Victorian Inman Park, Bohemian East Atlanta, and eclectic Old Fourth Ward. On the westside and along the BeltLine on the eastside, former warehouses and factories have been converted into housing, retail space, and art galleries, transforming the once-industrial areas such as West Midtown into model neighborhoods for smart growth, historic rehabilitation, and infill construction. In southwest Atlanta, neighborhoods closer to downtown originated as streetcar suburbs, including the historic West End, while those farther from downtown retain a postwar suburban layout, including Collier Heights and Cascade Heights, home to much of the city's affluent African American population. Northwest Atlanta contains the areas of the city to west of Marietta Boulevard and to the north of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, including those neighborhoods remote to downtown, such as Riverside, Bolton and Whittier Mill, which is one of Atlanta's designated Landmark Historical Neighborhoods. Vine City, though technically Northwest, adjoins the city's Downtown area and has recently been the target of community outreach programs and economic development initiatives.\n\nGentrification of the city's neighborhoods is one of the more controversial and transformative forces shaping contemporary Atlanta. The gentrification of Atlanta has its origins in the 1970s, after many of Atlanta's neighborhoods had undergone the urban decay that affected other major American cities in the mid-20th century. When neighborhood opposition successfully prevented two freeways from being built through city's the east side in 1975, the area became the starting point for Atlanta's gentrification. After Atlanta was awarded the Olympic games in 1990, gentrification expanded into other parts of the city, stimulated by infrastructure improvements undertaken in preparation for the games. Gentrification was aided by the Atlanta Housing Authority's eradication of the city's public housing.\n\nUnder the Köppen classification, Atlanta has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") with four distinct seasons and generous precipitation year-round, typical for the inland South. Summers are hot and humid, with temperatures somewhat moderated by the city's elevation. Winters are cool but variable, with an average of 48 freezing days per year and temperatures dropping to on rare occasions. Warm air from the Gulf of Mexico can bring spring-like highs while strong Arctic air masses can push lows into the teens (≤ −7 °C).\n\nJuly averages , with high temperatures reaching on an average 44 days per year, though readings are not seen most years. January averages , with temperatures in the suburbs slightly cooler due largely to the urban heat island effect. Lows at or below freezing can be expected 40 nights annually, but extended stretches with daily high temperatures below are very rare, with a recent exception in January 2014. Extremes range from on February 13, 1899 to on June 30, 2012. Dewpoints in the summer range from in June to in July.\n\nTypical of the southeastern U.S., Atlanta receives abundant rainfall that is evenly distributed throughout the year, though spring and early fall are markedly drier. The average annual rainfall is , while snowfall is typically light at around per year. The heaviest single snowfall occurred on January 23, 1940, with around of snow. However, ice storms usually cause more problems than snowfall does, the most severe occurring on January 7, 1973. Tornadoes are rare in the city itself, but the March 15, 2008 EF2 tornado damaged prominent structures in downtown Atlanta.\n\nThe 2010 United States Census reported that Atlanta had a population of 420,003. The population density was 3,154 per square mile (1232/km). The racial makeup and population of Atlanta was 54.0% Black or African American, 38.4% White, 3.1% Asian and 0.2% Native American. Those from some other race made up 2.2% of the city's population, while those from two or more races made up 2.0%. Hispanics of any race made up 5.2% of the city's population. The median income for a household in the city was $45,171. The per capita income for the city was $35,453. 22.6% percent of the population was living below the poverty line. Atlanta has one of the highest LGBT populations per capita, ranking third among major American cities, behind San Francisco and slightly behind Seattle, with 12.8% of the city's total population identifying as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. 7.3% of Atlantans were born abroad (86th in the US).\nIn the 2010 Census, Atlanta was recorded as the nation's fourth-largest majority-black city. It has long been known as a center of African-American political power, education, and culture, often called a black mecca. African-American residents of Atlanta have followed whites to newer housing in the suburbs in the early 21st century. From 2000 to 2010, the city's black population decreased by 31,678 people, shrinking from 61.4% of the city's population in 2000 to 54.0% in 2010.\n\nAt the same time, the white population of Atlanta has increased. Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of whites in the city's population grew faster than that of any other U.S. city. In that decade, Atlanta's white population grew from 31% to 38% of the city's population, an absolute increase of 22,753 people, more than triple the increase that occurred between 1990 and 2000.\n\nOut of the total population five years and older, 83.3% spoke only English at home, while 8.8% spoke Spanish, 3.9% another Indo-European language, and 2.8% an Asian language. Atlanta's dialect has traditionally been a variation of Southern American English. The Chattahoochee River long formed a border between the Coastal Southern and Southern Appalachian dialects. Because of the development of corporate headquarters in the region, attracting migrants from other areas of the country, by 2003, \"Atlanta\" magazine concluded that Atlanta had become significantly \"de-Southernized.\" A Southern accent was considered a handicap in some circumstances. In general, Southern accents are less prevalent among residents of the city and inner suburbs and among younger people; they are more common in the outer suburbs and among older people. At the same time, some residents of the city express Southern variations of African American Vernacular English.\n\nReligion in Atlanta, while historically centered on Protestant Christianity, now involves many faiths as a result of the city and metro area's increasingly international population. Protestant Christianity still maintains a strong presence in the city (63%), but in recent decades the Catholic Church has increased in numbers and influence because of new migrants in the region. Metro Atlanta also has numerous ethnic or national Christian congregations, including Korean and Indian churches. The larger non-Christian faiths are Judaism, Islam and Hinduism. Overall, there are over 1,000 places of worship within Atlanta.\n\nWith a GDP of $304 billion, the Metro Atlanta economy is the eighth-largest in the country and 17th-largest in the world. Corporate operations play a major role in the economy, as the city claims the country's third-largest concentration of Fortune 500 companies, and hosts the global headquarters of corporations such as The Coca-Cola Company, The Home Depot, Delta Air Lines, AT&T Mobility, Chick-fil-A, and UPS. Over 75 percent of Fortune 1000 companies conduct business operations in metro Atlanta, and the region hosts offices of over 1,250 multinational corporations. Many corporations are drawn to Atlanta by the city's educated workforce; , 45% of adults 25 or older in the city have at least 4-year college degrees, compared to the national average of 28%.\n\nAtlanta began as a railroad town and logistics has remained a major component of the city's economy to this day. Atlanta is an important rail junction and contains major classification yards for Norfolk Southern and CSX. Since its construction in the 1950s, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport has served as a key engine of Atlanta's economic growth. Delta Air Lines, the city's largest employer and the metro area's third-largest, operates the world's largest airline hub at Hartsfield-Jackson and has helped make it the world's busiest airport, both in terms of passenger traffic and aircraft operations. Partly due to the airport, Atlanta has become a hub for diplomatic missions; , the city contains 26 consulates general, the seventh-highest concentration of diplomatic missions in the United States.\n\nMedia is also an important aspect of Atlanta's economy. The city is a major cable television programming center. Ted Turner established the headquarters of both the Cable News Network (CNN) and the Turner Broadcasting System (TBS) in Atlanta. Cox Enterprises, the country's third-largest cable television service and the publisher of over a dozen American newspapers, is headquartered in the city. The Weather Channel is headquartered just outside Atlanta in Cobb County.\n\nInformation technology—a business sector that includes publishing, software development, entertainment and data processing—has garnered a larger percentage of Atlanta's economic output. Indeed, Atlanta has been nicknamed the Silicon peach due to its burgeoning technology sector. , Atlanta contains the fourth-largest concentration of information technology jobs in the United States, numbering 85,000. Atlanta ranks as the sixth fastest-growing city for information technology jobs, with an employment growth of 4.8% in 2012 and a three-year growth near 9%, or 16,000 jobs. Information technology companies are drawn to Atlanta's lower costs and educated workforce.\n\nRecently, Atlanta has become a center for film and television production, largely due to the Georgia Entertainment Industry Investment Act, which awards qualified productions a transferable income tax credit of 20% of all in-state costs for film and television investments of $500,000 or more. Film and television production facilities in Atlanta include Turner Studios, Pinewood Studios (Pinewood Atlanta), Tyler Perry Studios, Williams Street Productions, and the EUE/Screen Gems soundstages. Film and television production injected $6 billion into Georgia's economy in 2015, with Atlanta garnering most of the projects. Atlanta has gained recognition as a center of production of horror and zombie-related productions, with \"Atlanta\" magazine dubbing the city the \"Zombie Capital of the World\".\nCompared to other American cities, Atlanta's economy has been disproportionately affected by the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent recession, with the city's economy earning a ranking of 68 among 100 American cities in a September 2014 report due to an elevated unemployment rate, declining real income levels, and a depressed housing market. From 2010 to 2011, Atlanta saw a 0.9% contraction in employment and only a 0.4% rise in income. Though unemployment had dropped to 7% by late 2014, this was still higher than the national unemployment rate of 5.8% Atlanta's housing market has struggled, with home prices falling by 2.1% in January 2012, reaching levels not seen since 1996. Compared with a year earlier, the average home price in Atlanta fell 17.3% in February 2012, the largest annual drop in the history of the index for any city. The collapse in home prices has led some economists to deem Atlanta the worst housing market in the country. Nevertheless, in August 2013, Atlanta appeared on \"Forbes\" magazine's list of the Best Places for Business and Careers.\n\nAtlanta is a city located in the South that has a culture which is extremely dynamic. This is due to a large population of migrants from other parts of the U.S., in addition to many recent immigrants to the U.S. who have made the metropolitan area their home, establishing Atlanta as the cultural and economic hub of an increasingly multi-cultural metropolitan area. Thus, although traditional Southern culture is part of Atlanta's cultural fabric, it is mostly the backdrop to one of the nation's most cosmopolitan cities. This unique cultural combination reveals itself in the arts district of Midtown, the quirky neighborhoods on the city's eastside, and the multi-ethnic enclaves found along Buford Highway.\n\nAtlanta is one of few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Atlanta Opera), ballet (Atlanta Ballet), orchestral music (Atlanta Symphony Orchestra), and theater (the Alliance Theatre). Atlanta attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions catering to a variety of interests. Atlanta's performing arts district is concentrated in Midtown Atlanta at the Woodruff Arts Center, which is home to the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra and the Alliance Theatre. The city frequently hosts touring Broadway acts, especially at The Fox Theatre, a historic landmark that is among the highest-grossing theatres of its size.\n\nAs a national center for the arts, Atlanta is home to significant art museums and institutions. The renowned High Museum of Art is arguably the South's leading art museum and among the most-visited art museums in the world. The Museum of Design Atlanta (MODA), a design museum, is the only such museum in the Southeast. Contemporary art museums include the Atlanta Contemporary Art Center and the Museum of Contemporary Art of Georgia. Institutions of higher education contribute to Atlanta's art scene, with the Savannah College of Art and Design's Atlanta campus providing the city's arts community with a steady stream of curators, and Emory University's Michael C. Carlos Museum containing the largest collection of ancient art in the Southeast.\n\nAtlanta has played a major or contributing role in the development of various genres of American music at different points in the city's history. Beginning as early as the 1920s, Atlanta emerged as a center for country music, which was brought to the city by migrants from Appalachia. During the countercultural 1960s, Atlanta hosted the Atlanta International Pop Festival, with the 1969 festival taking place more than a month before Woodstock and featuring many of the same bands. The city was also a center for Southern rock during its 1970s heyday: the Allman Brothers Band's hit instrumental \"Hot 'Lanta\" is an ode to the city, while Lynyrd Skynyrd's famous live rendition of \"Free Bird\" was recorded at the Fox Theatre in 1976, with lead singer Ronnie Van Zant directing the band to \"play it pretty for Atlanta\". During the 1980s, Atlanta had an active Punk rock scene that was centered on two of the city's music venues, 688 Club and the Metroplex, and Atlanta famously played host to the Sex Pistols first U.S. show, which was performed at the Great Southeastern Music Hall. The 1990s saw the birth of Atlanta hip hop, a subgenre that gained relevance following the success of home-grown duo OutKast; however, it was not until the 2000s that Atlanta moved \"from the margins to becoming hip-hop's center of gravity, part of a larger shift in hip-hop innovation to the South\". Also in the 2000s, Atlanta was recognized by the Brooklyn-based \"Vice\" magazine for its indie rock scene, which revolves around the various live music venues found on the city's alternative eastside.\n\n, Atlanta is the seventh-most visited city in the United States, with over 35 million visitors per year. Although the most popular attraction among visitors to Atlanta is the Georgia Aquarium, the world's largest indoor aquarium, Atlanta's tourism industry is mostly driven by the city's history museums and outdoor attractions. Atlanta contains a notable amount of historical museums and sites, including the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, which includes the preserved childhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., as well as his final resting place; the Atlanta Cyclorama & Civil War Museum, which houses a massive painting and diorama in-the-round, with a rotating central audience platform, depicting the Battle of Atlanta in the Civil War; the World of Coca-Cola, featuring the history of the world-famous soft drink brand and its well-known advertising; the College Football Hall of Fame which honors college football and its athletes; the National Center for Civil and Human Rights, which explores the Civil Rights Movement and its connection to contemporary human rights movements throughout the world; the Carter Center and Presidential Library, housing U.S. President Jimmy Carter's papers and other material relating to the Carter administration and the Carter family's life; and the Margaret Mitchell House and Museum, where Mitchell wrote the best-selling novel \"Gone with the Wind\".\n\nAtlanta contains various outdoor attractions. The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, is home to the Kendeda Canopy Walk, a skywalk that allows visitors to tour one of the city's last remaining urban forests from . The Canopy Walk is considered the only canopy-level pathway of its kind in the United States. Zoo Atlanta, located in Grant Park, accommodates over 1,300 animals representing more than 220 species. Home to the nation's largest collections of gorillas and orangutans, the Zoo is one of only four zoos in the U.S. to house giant pandas. Festivals showcasing arts and crafts, film, and music, including the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, the Atlanta Film Festival, and Music Midtown, respectively, are also popular with tourists.\n\nTourists are drawn to the city's culinary scene, which comprises a mix of urban establishments garnering national attention, ethnic restaurants serving cuisine from every corner of the world, and traditional eateries specializing in Southern dining. Since the turn of the 21st century, Atlanta has emerged as a sophisticated restaurant town. Many restaurants opened in the city's gentrifying neighborhoods have received praise at the national level, including Bocado, Bacchanalia, and Miller Union in West Midtown, Empire State South in Midtown, and Two Urban Licks and Rathbun's on the east side. In 2011, the \"New York Times\" characterized Empire State South and Miller Union as reflecting \"a new kind of sophisticated Southern sensibility centered on the farm but experienced in the city.\" Visitors seeking to sample international Atlanta are directed to Buford Highway, the city's international corridor. There, the million-plus immigrants that make Atlanta home have established various authentic ethnic restaurants representing virtually every nationality on the globe. For traditional Southern fare, one of the city's most famous establishments is The Varsity, a long-lived fast food chain and the world's largest drive-in restaurant. Mary Mac's Tea Room and Paschal's are more formal destinations for Southern food.\n\nAtlanta is home to professional franchises for four major team sports: the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball, the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association, the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League, and Atlanta United FC of Major League Soccer. The Braves, who moved to Atlanta in 1966, were established as the Boston Red Stockings in 1871 and are the oldest continually operating professional sports franchise in the United States. The Braves won the World Series in 1995, and had an unprecedented run of 14 straight divisional championships from 1991 to 2005. The Braves have a new home in 2017, having moved from Turner Field to Suntrust Park, which is located in the Atlanta Metropolitan area 10 miles (16 km) northwest of downtown Atlanta in Cumberland/Galleria, Georgia.\n\nThe Atlanta Falcons have played in Atlanta since their inception in 1966. The Falcons have won the division title six times (1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012, 2016) and the NFC championship twice in 1998 and 2016. However, they have been unsuccessful in both of their Super Bowl trips so far, losing to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999 and to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI in 2017. The Atlanta Hawks began in 1946 as the Tri-Cities Blackhawks, playing in Moline, Illinois. The team moved to Atlanta in 1968, and they currently play their games in Philips Arena. The Atlanta Dream is the city's Women's National Basketball Association franchise.\n\nAtlanta has had its own professional ice hockey and soccer franchises. The National Hockey League (NHL) has had two Atlanta franchises: the Atlanta Flames began play in 1972 before moving to Calgary in 1980, while the Atlanta Thrashers began play in 1999 before moving to Winnipeg in 2011. The Atlanta Chiefs was the city's professional soccer team from 1967 to 1972, and the team won a national championship in 1968. In 1998 another professional soccer team was formed, the Atlanta Silverbacks of the North American Soccer League. In April 2014, Atlanta United FC, was formed as an expansion team to begin play in 2017.\n\nAtlanta has been the host city for various international, professional and collegiate sporting events. Most famously, Atlanta hosted the Centennial 1996 Summer Olympics. Atlanta hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000. In professional golf, The Tour Championship, the final PGA Tour event of the season, is played annually at East Lake Golf Club. In 2001 and 2011, Atlanta hosted the PGA Championship, one of the four major championships in men's professional golf, at the Atlanta Athletic Club. In professional ice hockey, the city hosted the 56th NHL All-Star Game in 2008, three years before the Thrashers moved. In 2011, Atlanta hosted professional wrestling's annual WrestleMania. The city has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men's Basketball Championship four times, most recently in 2013. In college football, Atlanta hosts the Chick-fil-A Kickoff Game, the SEC Championship Game, and the Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl.\n\nAtlanta's 343 parks, nature preserves, and gardens cover , which amounts to only 5.6% of the city's total acreage, compared to the national average of just over 10%. However, 64% of Atlantans live within a 10-minute walk of a park, a percentage equal to the national average. In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that among the park systems of the 50 most populous U.S. cities, Atlanta's park system received a ranking of 31. Piedmont Park, located in Midtown, is Atlanta's most iconic green space. The park, which underwent a major renovation and expansion in recent years, attracts visitors from across the region and hosts cultural events throughout the year. Other notable city parks include Centennial Olympic Park, a legacy of the 1996 Summer Olympics that forms the centerpiece of the city's tourist district; Woodruff Park, which anchors the campus of Georgia State University; Grant Park, home to Zoo Atlanta; and Chastain Park, which houses an amphitheater used for live music concerts. The Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area, located in the northwestern corner of the city, preserves a stretch of the river for public recreation opportunities. The Atlanta Botanical Garden, adjacent to Piedmont Park, contains formal gardens, including a Japanese garden and a rose garden, woodland areas, and a conservatory that includes indoor exhibits of plants from tropical rainforests and deserts. The BeltLine, a former rail corridor that forms a loop around Atlanta's core, has been transformed into a series of parks, connected by a multi-use trail, increasing Atlanta's park space by 40%.\n\nAtlanta offers resources and opportunities for amateur and participatory sports and recreation. Jogging is a popular local sport, and the city hosts the Peachtree Road Race, the world's largest race, annually on Independence Day. The Georgia Marathon, which begins and ends at Centennial Olympic Park, routes through the city's historic east side neighborhoods. Golf and tennis are popular in Atlanta, and the city contains six public golf courses and 182 tennis courts. Facilities located along the Chattahoochee River cater to watersports enthusiasts, providing the opportunity for kayaking, canoeing, fishing, boating, or tubing. The city's only skate park, a facility that offers bowls, curbs, and smooth-rolling concrete mounds, is located at Historic Fourth Ward Park.\n\nAtlanta is governed by a mayor and the Atlanta City Council. The city council consists of 15 representatives—one from each of the city's 12 districts and three at-large positions. The mayor may veto a bill passed by the council, but the council can override the veto with a two-thirds majority. The mayor of Atlanta is Kasim Reed, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot whose first term in office expired at the end of 2013. Reed was elected to a second term on November 5, 2013.\nEvery mayor elected since 1973 has been black. In 2001, Shirley Franklin became the first woman to be elected Mayor of Atlanta, and the first African-American woman to serve as mayor of a major southern city. Atlanta city politics suffered from a notorious reputation for corruption during the 1990s administration of Mayor Bill Campbell, who was convicted by a federal jury in 2006 on three counts of tax evasion in connection with gambling winnings during trips he took with city contractors.\n\nAs the state capital, Atlanta is the site of most of Georgia's state government. The Georgia State Capitol building, located downtown, houses the offices of the governor, lieutenant governor and secretary of state, as well as the General Assembly. The Governor's Mansion is located in a residential section of Buckhead. Atlanta serves as the regional hub for many arms of the federal bureaucracy, including the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Atlanta also plays an important role in federal judiciary system, containing the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia.\n\nHistorically, Atlanta has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party. Although municipal elections are officially nonpartisan, nearly all of the city's elected officials are registered Democrats. The city is split among 14 state house districts and four state senate districts, all held by Democrats. At the federal level, Atlanta is split between two congressional districts. The northern three-fourths of the city is located in the 5th district, represented by Democrat John Lewis. The southern fourth is in the 13th district, represented by Democrat David Scott.\n\nThe city is served by the Atlanta Police Department, which numbers 2,000 officers and oversaw a 40% decrease in the city's crime rate between 2001 and 2009. Specifically, homicide decreased by 57%, rape by 72%, and violent crime overall by 55%. Crime is down across the country, but Atlanta's improvement has occurred at more than twice the national rate. Nevertheless, Forbes ranked Atlanta as the sixth most dangerous city in the United States in 2012.\n\nDue to the more than 30 colleges and universities located in the city, Atlanta is considered a center for higher education. The Georgia Institute of Technology is one of the most prominent public universities in Atlanta; it is a research university located in Midtown that has been consistently ranked among the nation's top ten public universities for its degree programs in engineering, computing, management, the sciences, architecture, and liberal arts. Georgia State University is a major public research university located in Downtown Atlanta; it is the largest of the 29 public colleges and universities in the University System of Georgia and is a significant contributor to the revitalization of the city's central business district. Atlanta is home to nationally renowned private colleges and universities, most notably Emory University, a leading liberal arts and research institution that ranks among the top 20 schools in the United States and operates Emory Healthcare, the largest health care system in Georgia.\n\nFifty-five thousand students are enrolled in 106 schools in Atlanta Public Schools, some of which are operated as charter schools. The district has been plagued by a widely publicized cheating scandal that was exposed in 2009. Atlanta is served by many private schools, including parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Atlanta.\n\nThe primary network-affiliated television stations in Atlanta are WXIA-TV (NBC), WGCL-TV (CBS), WSB-TV (ABC), and WAGA-TV (FOX). The Atlanta metropolitan area is served by two public television stations and one public radio station. WGTV is the flagship station of the statewide Georgia Public Television network and is a PBS member station, while WPBA is owned by Atlanta Public Schools. Georgia Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, WABE, a classical music station operated by Atlanta Public Schools.\n\nAtlanta is served by the \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\", its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. The \"Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" is the result of a 1950 merger between \"The Atlanta Journal\" and \"The Atlanta Constitution\", with staff consolidation occurring in 1982 and separate publication of the morning \"Constitution\" and afternoon \"Journal\" ceasing in 2001. Alternative weekly newspapers include \"Creative Loafing\", which has a weekly print circulation of 80,000. \"Atlanta\" magazine is an award-winning, monthly general-interest magazine based in and covering Atlanta.\n\nAtlanta's transportation infrastructure comprises a complex network that includes a heavy rail rapid transit system, a light rail streetcar loop, a multi-county bus system, Amtrak service via the Crescent, multiple freight train lines, an Interstate Highway System, several airports, including the world's busiest, and over of bike paths.\n\nAtlanta has a network of freeways that radiate out from the city, and automobiles are the dominant means of transportation in the region. Three major interstate highways converge in Atlanta: I-20 (east-west), I-75 (northwest-southeast), and I-85 (northeast-southwest). The latter two combine in the middle of the city to form the Downtown Connector (I-75/85), which carries more than 340,000 vehicles per day and is one of the most congested segments of interstate highway in the United States. Atlanta is mostly encircled by Interstate 285, a beltway locally known as \"the Perimeter\" that has come to mark the boundary between \"Inside the Perimeter\" (ITP), the city and close-in suburbs, and \"Outside the Perimeter\" (OTP), the outer suburbs and exurbs. The heavy reliance on automobiles for transportation in Atlanta has resulted in traffic, commute, and air pollution rates that rank among the worst in the country.\n\nThe Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) provides public transportation in the form of buses and heavy rail. Notwithstanding heavy automotive usage in Atlanta, the city's subway system is the eighth busiest in the country. MARTA rail lines connect key destinations, such as the airport, Downtown, Midtown, Buckhead, and Perimeter Center. However, significant destinations, such as Emory University and Cumberland, remain unserved. As a result, a 2011 Brookings Institution study placed Atlanta 91st of 100 metro areas for transit accessibility. Emory University operates its Cliff shuttle buses with 200,000 boardings per month, while private minibuses supply Buford Highway. Amtrak, the national rail passenger system, provides service to Atlanta via the \"Crescent train\" (New York–New Orleans), which stops at Peachtree Station. In 2014, the Atlanta Streetcar opened to the public. The streetcar's line, which is also known as the Downtown Loop, runs 2.7 miles around the downtown tourist areas of Peachtree Center, Centennial Olympic Park, the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site, and Sweet Auburn. The Atlanta Streetcar line is also being expanded on in the coming years to include a wider range of Atlanta's neighborhoods and important places of interest, with a total of over 50 miles of track in the plan.\n\nHartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport is the world's busiest airport as measured by passenger traffic and aircraft traffic. The facility offers air service to over 150 U.S. destinations and more than 75 international destinations in 50 countries, with over 2,500 arrivals and departures daily. Delta Air Lines maintains its largest hub at the airport. Situated () south of downtown, the airport covers most of the land inside a wedge formed by Interstate 75, Interstate 85, and Interstate 285.\n\nCycling is a growing mode of transportation in Atlanta, more than doubling since 2009, when it comprised 1.1% of all commutes (up from 0.3% in 2000). Although Atlanta's lack of bike lanes and hilly topography may deter many residents from cycling, the city's transportation plan calls for the construction of of bike lanes by 2020, with the BeltLine helping to achieve this goal. In 2012, Atlanta's first \"bike track\" was constructed on 10th Street in Midtown. The two lane bike track runs from Monroe Drive west to Charles Allen Drive, with connections to the Beltline and Piedmont Park. Starting in June 2016, Atlanta received a bike sharing program with 100 bikes in Downtown and Midtown, which expanded to 500 bikes at 65 stations as of April 2017.\n\nAtlanta has a reputation as a \"city in a forest\" due to an abundance of trees that is rare among major cities. The city's main street is named after a tree, and beyond the Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead business districts, the skyline gives way to a dense canopy of woods that spreads into the suburbs. The city is home to the Atlanta Dogwood Festival, an annual arts and crafts festival held one weekend during early April, when the native dogwoods are in bloom. The nickname is factually accurate, as the city's tree coverage percentage is at 36%, the highest out of all major American cities, and above the national average of 27%. Atlanta's tree coverage does not go unnoticed—it was the main reason cited by \"National Geographic\" in naming Atlanta a \"Place of a Lifetime\".\n\nThe city's lush tree canopy, which filters out pollutants and cools sidewalks and buildings, has increasingly been under assault from man and nature due to heavy rains, drought, aged forests, new pests, and urban construction. A 2001 study found that Atlanta's heavy tree cover declined from 48% in 1974 to 38% in 1996. Community organizations and the city government are addressing the problem. Trees Atlanta, a non-profit organization founded in 1985, has planted and distributed over 75,000 shade trees in the city, and Atlanta's government has awarded $130,000 in grants to neighborhood groups to plant trees.\n\nAtlanta has 17 sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International, Inc. (SCI):\n\n"}
{"id": "3143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3143", "title": "Axiology", "text": "Axiology\n\nAxiology (from Greek , \"axia\", \"value, worth\"; and , \"-logia\") is the philosophical study of value. It is either the collective term for ethics and aesthetics—philosophical fields that depend crucially on notions of worth—or the foundation for these fields, and thus similar to value theory and meta-ethics. The term was first used by Paul Lapie, in 1902, and Eduard von Hartmann, in 1908.\n\nAxiology studies mainly two kinds of values: ethics and aesthetics. Ethics investigates the concepts of \"right\" and \"good\" in individual and social conduct. Aesthetics studies the concepts of \"beauty\" and \"harmony.\" Formal axiology, the attempt to lay out principles regarding value with mathematical rigor, is exemplified by Robert S. Hartman's science of value.\n\nBetween the 5th and 6th century BC, it was important in Greece to be knowledgeable if you were to be successful. Philosophers began to recognize that differences existed between the laws and morality of society. Socrates held the belief that knowledge had a vital connection to virtue, making morality and democracy closely intertwined. Socrates' student, Plato furthered the belief by establishing virtues which should be followed by all. With the fall of the government, values became individual, causing skeptic schools of thought to flourish, ultimately shaping a pagan philosophy that is thought to have influenced and shaped Christianity. During the medieval times, Thomas Aquinas argued for a separation between natural and religious virtues. This concept led philosophers to distinguish between judgments based on fact and judgments based on values, creating division between science and philosophy.\n\nCommunication theorists seek to contribute to mutual intelligence about the anatomy and operation of human communication. The axiological issues that are significant for the evolution of communication theory are whether research can be truly free of value and whether the end for the administered research should be designed to expand knowledge or to change society. For communication theorists, a primary interest is with the philosophical establishment of the research approach. A continuing value debate occurs between scholars who comply with a conventional scientific approach and those who take an interpretivist approach to communication development.\n\nThose who take a conventional scientific approach believe that research must be free of values in order to be valid. Therefore, it is necessary for the scientist to approach their research in a neutral and objective manner. In contrast, the interpretivists argue that it is impossible for research to be completely free of personal values, as research is always biased towards the values of the researcher. According to interpretivists, these biases are sometimes so entrenched in the researcher's culture that they will most likely go unnoticed during research. Since no one can truly be unbiased, some groups are more knowledgeable about certain things than other groups due to their positions in society, and they can be considered more qualified to perform research on certain topics as a result.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3144", "title": "A Doll's House", "text": "A Doll's House\n\nA Doll's House (; also translated as \"A Doll House\") is a three-act play written by Henrik Ibsen. It premiered at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 21 December 1879, having been published earlier that month. The play is set in a Norwegian town circa 1879.\n\nThe play is significant for the way it deals with the fate of a married woman, who at the time in Norway lacked reasonable opportunities for self-fulfillment in a male dominated world. It aroused a great sensation at the time, and caused a “storm of outraged controversy” that went beyond the theatre to the world newspapers and society.\n\nIn 2006, the centennial of Ibsen's death, \"A Doll's House\" held the distinction of being the world's most performed play for that year. UNESCO has inscribed Ibsen's autographed manuscripts of \"A Doll's House\" on the Memory of the World Register in 2001, in recognition of their historical value.\n\nThe title of the play is most commonly translated as \"A Doll's House\", though some scholars use \"A Doll House\". John Simon says that \"A Doll’s House\" is \"the British term for what we call a 'dollhouse'\". Egil Törnqvist says of the alternative title: \"Rather than being superior to the traditional rendering, it simply sounds more idiomatic to Americans.\"\n\n\nThe play opens at Christmas time as Nora Helmer enters her home carrying a number of packages. Nora's husband Torvald is working in his study when she arrives. He playfully rebukes her for spending so much money on Christmas gifts, calling her his \"little squirrel\". He teases her about how she spent weeks making gifts and ornaments by hand last year because money was scarce. This year Torvald is due a promotion at the bank where he works, so Nora feels that they can let themselves go a little. The maid announces two visitors: Mrs. Kristine Linde, an old friend of Nora's, who has come seeking employment, and Dr. Rank, a close friend of the family, who is let into the study. Kristine has had a difficult few years, ever since her husband died leaving her with no money or children. Nora explains that things have not been easy for them either: Torvald became sick and they had to travel to Italy so he could recover. Kristine further explains that when her mother was ill, she had to take care of her brothers, but now that they are grown she feels her life is \"unspeakably empty\". Nora promises to talk to Torvald about finding her a job. Kristine gently tells Nora that she is like a child. Nora is offended, so she reveals that she borrowed money from \"some admirer\", so they could travel to Italy to improve Torvald's health. She told Torvald that her father gave her the money, but in fact she managed to illegally borrow it without his knowledge. Over the years, she has been secretly working and saving up to pay it off.\n\nKrogstad, a lower-level employee at Torvald's bank, arrives and goes into the study. Nora is clearly uneasy when she sees him. Dr. Rank leaves the study and mentions that he feels wretched, though, like everyone, he wants to go on living. In contrast to his physical illness, he says that the man in the study, Krogstad, is \"morally diseased\".\n\nAfter the meeting with Krogstad, Torvald comes out of the study. Nora asks him if he can give Kristine a position at the bank and Torvald is very positive, saying that this is a fortunate moment, as a position has just become available. Torvald, Kristine, and Dr. Rank leave the house, leaving Nora alone. The nanny returns with the children and Nora plays with them for a while until Krogstad creeps into the living room and surprises her. Krogstad tells Nora that Torvald intends to fire him at the bank and asks her to intercede with Torvald to allow him to keep his job. She refuses and Krogstad threatens to blackmail her about the loan she took out for the trip to Italy; he knows that she obtained this loan by forging her father's signature. Krogstad leaves and when Torvald returns, she tries to convince him not to fire Krogstad. Torvald refuses to hear her pleas, explaining that Krogstad is a liar and a hypocrite and that he committed a terrible crime: he forged someone's name. Torvald feels physically ill in the presence of a man \"poisoning his own children with lies and dissimulation\".\n\nKristine arrives to help Nora repair a dress for a costume function that Torvald and she plan to attend the next day. Torvald returns from the bank, and Nora pleads with him to reinstate Krogstad, claiming she is worried Krogstad will publish libelous articles about Torvald and ruin his career. Torvald dismisses her fears and explains that, although Krogstad is a good worker and seems to have turned his life around, he must be fired because he is not deferential enough to Torvald in front of other bank personnel. Torvald then retires to his study to work.\n\nDr. Rank, the family friend, arrives. Nora asks him for a favor, but Rank responds by revealing that he has entered the terminal stage of tuberculosis of the spine and that he has always been secretly in love with her. Nora tries to deny the first revelation and make light of it, but is more disturbed by his declaration of love. She tries clumsily to tell him that she is not in love with him, but that she loves him dearly as a friend.\n\nDesperate after being fired by Torvald, Krogstad arrives at the house. Nora convinces Dr. Rank to go into Torvald's study so he will not see Krogstad. When Krogstad confronts Nora, he declares that he no longer cares about the remaining balance of Nora's loan, but that he will instead preserve the associated bond to blackmail Torvald into not only keeping him employed but also promoting him. Nora explains that she has done her best to persuade her husband, but he refuses to change his mind. Krogstad informs Nora that he has written a letter detailing her crime (forging her father's signature of surety on the bond) and put it in Torvald's mailbox, which is locked.\n\nNora tells Kristine of her difficult situation. Having had a relationship with Krogstad in the past before her marriage, Kristine says that they are still in love and promises to try to convince him to relent.\n\nTorvald enters and tries to retrieve his mail, but Nora distracts him by begging him to help her with the dance she has been rehearsing for the costume party, feigning anxiety about performing. She dances so badly and acts so childishly that Torvald agrees to spend the whole evening coaching her. When the others go to dinner, Nora stays behind for a few minutes and contemplates killing herself to save her husband from the shame of the revelation of her crime and to pre-empt any gallant gesture on his part to save her reputation.\n\nKristine tells Krogstad that she only married her husband because she had no other means to support her sick mother and young siblings and that she has returned to offer him her love again. She believes that he would not have stooped to unethical behavior if he had not been devastated by her abandonment and been in dire financial straits. Krogstad is moved and offers to take back his letter to Torvald. However, Kristine decides that Torvald should know the truth for the sake of his and Nora's marriage.\n\nAfter literally dragging Nora home from the party, Torvald goes to check his mail, but is interrupted by Dr. Rank, who has followed them. Dr. Rank chats for a while, conveying obliquely to Nora that this is a final goodbye, as he has determined that his death is near. Dr. Rank leaves, and Torvald retrieves his letters. As he reads them, Nora steels herself to take her life. Torvald confronts her with Krogstad's letter. Enraged, he declares that he is now completely in Krogstad's power – he must yield to Krogstad's demands and keep quiet about the whole affair. He berates Nora, calling her a dishonest and immoral woman and telling her that she is unfit to raise their children. He says that from now on their marriage will be only a matter of appearances.\n\nA maid enters, delivering a letter to Nora. The letter is from Krogstad, yet Torvald demands to read the letter, taking it from Nora. Torvald exults that he is saved, as Krogstad has returned the incriminating bond, which Torvald immediately burns along with Krogstad's letters. He takes back his harsh words to his wife and tells her that he forgives her. Nora realizes that her husband is not the strong and gallant man she thought he was, and that he truly loves himself more than he does her.\n\nTorvald explains that, when a man has forgiven his wife, it makes him love her all the more, since it reminds him that she is totally dependent on him, like a child. He dismisses the fact that Nora had to make the agonizing choice between her conscience and his health, and ignores her years of secret efforts to free them from the ensuing obligations and the danger of loss of reputation. He preserves his peace of mind by thinking of the incident as a mere mistake that she made owing to her dumbness, one of her most endearing feminine traits.\n\nNora tells Torvald that she is leaving him, and in a confrontational scene between the two of them, she expresses her reasons and explanations. She reminds him of harsh things he has said about her and about her ability to raise their children. She says he has never loved her, they have become strangers to each other. She feels betrayed by his response to the scandal involving Krogstad, and she says she must get away to understand herself. She has lost her religion. She says that she has been treated like a doll to play with for her whole life, first by her father and then by him. Concerned for the family reputation, Torvald insists that she fulfill her duty as a wife and mother, but Nora says that she has duties to herself that are just as important, and that she cannot be a good mother or wife without learning to be more than a plaything. She reveals that she had expected that he would want to sacrifice his reputation for hers and that she had planned to kill herself to prevent him from doing so. She now realizes that Torvald is not at all the kind of person she had believed him to be and that their marriage has been based on mutual fantasies and misunderstandings.\n\nTorvald is unable to comprehend Nora's point of view, since it contradicts all that he has been taught about the female mind throughout his life. Furthermore, he is so narcissistic that it is impossible for him to understand how he appears to her, as selfish, hypocritical, and more concerned with public reputation than with actual morality. Nora leaves her keys and wedding ring, and as Torvald breaks down and begins to cry, baffled by what has happened, Nora leaves the house, slamming the door behind herself. Whether or not she ever comes back is never made clear.\n\nIbsen's German agent felt that the original ending would not play well in German theatres; therefore, for it to be considered acceptable, Ibsen was forced to write an alternative ending for the German premiere. In this ending, Nora is led to her children after having argued with Torvald. Seeing them, she collapses, and the curtain is brought down. Ibsen later called the ending a disgrace to the original play and referred to it as a \"barbaric outrage\". Virtually all productions today use the original ending, as do nearly all of the film versions of the play.\n\n\"A Doll's House\" was based on the life of Laura Kieler (maiden name Laura Smith Petersen), a good friend of Ibsen. Much that happened between Nora and Torvald happened to Laura and her husband, Victor. Similar to the events in the play, Laura signed an illegal loan to save her husband. She wanted the money to find a cure for her husband's tuberculosis. She wrote to Ibsen, asking for his recommendation of her work to his publisher, thinking that the sales of her book would repay her debt. At his refusal, she forged a check for the money. At this point she was found out. In real life, when Victor discovered about Laura's secret loan, he divorced her and had her committed to an asylum. Two years later, she returned to her husband and children at his urging, and she went on to become a well-known Danish author, living to the age of 83.\n\nIbsen wrote \"A Doll's House\" at the point when Laura Kieler had been committed to the asylum, and the fate of this friend of the family shook him deeply, perhaps also because Laura had asked him to intervene at a crucial point in the scandal, which he did not feel able or willing to do. Instead, he turned this life situation into an aesthetically shaped, successful drama. In the play, Nora leaves Torvald with head held high, though facing an uncertain future given the limitations single women faced in the society of the time.\n\nKieler eventually rebounded from the shame of the scandal and had her own successful writing career while remaining discontented with sole recognition as \"Ibsen's Nora\" years afterwards.\n\nIbsen started thinking about the play around May 1878, although he did not begin its first draft until a year later, having reflected on the themes and characters in the intervening period (he visualised its protagonist, Nora, for instance, as having approached him one day wearing \"a blue woollen dress\"). He outlined his conception of the play as a \"modern tragedy\" in a note written in Rome on 19 October 1878. \"A woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" he argues, since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint.\"\n\nIbsen sent a fair copy of the completed play to his publisher on 15 September 1879. It was first published in Copenhagen on 4 December 1879, in an edition of 8,000 copies that sold out within a month; a second edition of 3,000 copies followed on 4 January 1880, and a third edition of 2,500 was issued on 8 March.\n\n\"A Doll's House\" received its world premiere on 21 December 1879 at the Royal Theatre in Copenhagen, with Betty Hennings as Nora, Emil Poulsen as Torvald, and Peter Jerndorff as Dr. Rank. Writing for the Norwegian newspaper \"Folkets Avis\", the critic Erik Bøgh admired Ibsen's originality and technical mastery: \"Not a single declamatory phrase, no high dramatics, no drop of blood, not even a tear.\" Every performance of its run was sold out. Another production opened at the Royal Theatre in Stockholm, on 8 January 1880, while productions in Christiania (with Johanne Juell as Nora and Arnoldus Reimers as Torvald) and Bergen followed shortly after.\n\nIn Germany, the actress Hedwig Niemann-Raabe refused to perform the play as written, declaring, \"\"I\" would never leave \"my\" children!\" Since the playwright's wishes were not protected by copyright, Ibsen decided to avoid the danger of being rewritten by a lesser dramatist by committing what he called a \"barbaric outrage\" on his play himself and giving it an alternative ending in which Nora did not leave. A production of this version opened in Flensburg in February 1880. This version was also played in Hamburg, Dresden, Hanover, and Berlin, although, in the wake of protests and a lack of success, Niemann-Raabe eventually restored the original ending. Another production of the original version, some rehearsals of which Ibsen attended, opened on 3 March 1880 at the Residenz Theatre in Munich.\n\nIn Great Britain, the only way in which the play was initially allowed to be given in London was in an adaptation by Henry Arthur Jones and Henry Herman called \"Breaking a Butterfly\". This adaptation was produced at the Princess Theatre, 3 March 1884. Writing in 1896 in his book \"The Foundations of a National Drama\", Jones says: \"A rough translation from the German version of A Doll's House was put into my hands, and I was told that if it could be turned into a sympathetic play, a ready opening would be found for it on the London boards. I knew nothing of Ibsen, but I knew a great deal of Robertson and H. J. Byron. From these circumstances came the adaptation called \"Breaking a Butterfly\".\" H. L. Mencken writes that it was \"A Doll’s House\" “denaturized and dephlogisticated. … Toward the middle of the action Ibsen was thrown to the fishes, and Nora was saved from suicide, rebellion, flight and immortality by making a faithful old clerk steal her fateful promissory note from Krogstad’s desk. … The curtain fell upon a happy home.“\n\nBefore 1899 there were two private productions of the play in London (in its original form as Ibsen wrote it) — one featured George Bernard Shaw in the role of Krogstad. The first public British production of the play in its regular form opened on 7 June 1889 at the Novelty Theatre, starring Janet Achurch as Nora and Charles Charrington as Torvald. Achurch played Nora again for a 7-day run in 1897. Soon after its London premiere, Achurch brought the play to Australia in 1889.\n\nThe play was first seen in America in 1883 in Louisville, Kentucky; Helena Modjeska acted Nora. The play made its Broadway premiere at the Palmer's Theatre on 21 December 1889, starring Beatrice Cameron as Nora Helmer. It was first performed in France in 1894.\nOther productions in the United States include one in 1902 starring Minnie Maddern Fiske, a 1937 adaptation with acting script by Thornton Wilder and starring Ruth Gordon, and a 1971 production starring Claire Bloom.\n\nA new translation by Zinnie Harris at the Donmar Warehouse, starring Gillian Anderson, Toby Stephens, Anton Lesser, Tara FitzGerald and Christopher Eccleston opened in May 2009. In August 2013, Young Vic, London, Great Britain, produced a new adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" directed by Carrie Cracknell based on the English language version by Simon Stephens.\nIn September 2014, in partnership with Brisbane Festival, La Boite located in Brisbane, Australia, hosted an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" written by Lally Katz and directed by Stephen Mitchell Wright.\nIn June 2015, Space Arts Centre in London staged an adaptation of \"A Doll's House\" featuring the discarded alternate ending.\n\n\"A Doll's House\" questions the traditional roles of men and women in 19th-century marriage. To many 19th-century Europeans, this was scandalous. The covenant of marriage was considered holy, and to portray it as Ibsen did was controversial; however, the Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw found Ibsen's willingness to examine society without prejudice exhilarating.\n\nThe Swedish playwright August Strindberg criticised the play in his volume of essays and short stories \"Getting Married\" (1884). Strindberg questioned Nora’s walking out and leaving her children behind with a man that she herself disapproved of so much that she would not remain with him. Strindberg also considers that Nora’s involvement with an illegal financial fraud that involved Nora forging a signature, all done behind her husband’s back, and then Nora’s lying to her husband regarding Krogstad’s blackmail, are serious crimes that should raise questions at the end of the play, when Nora is moralistically judging her husband. And Strindberg points out that Nora’s complaint that she and Torvald “have never exchanged one serious word about serious things”, is contradicted by the discussions that occur in act one and two.\n\nThe reason Nora leaves her husband are complex; various reasons are hinted at throughout the play. In the last scene she tells her husband she has been “greatly wronged” by his disparaging and condescending treatment of her, and his attitude towards her in their marriage — as though she were his “doll wife” — and the children in turn have become her “dolls”, and she has come to doubt her own qualifications to raise her children. She is troubled by her husband’s behavior in regard to her and the scandal of the loaned money. She does not love her husband, she feels they are strangers, she feels completely confused, and suggests that her issues are shared by many women. George Bernard Shaw suggests that she left to begin “a journey in search of self-respect and apprenticeship to life,” and that her revolt is “the end of a chapter of human history”.\n\nIbsen was inspired by the belief that \"a woman cannot be herself in modern society,\" since it is \"an exclusively male society, with laws made by men and with prosecutors and judges who assess feminine conduct from a masculine standpoint.\" Its ideas can also be seen as having a wider application: Michael Meyer argued that the play's theme is not women's rights, but rather \"the need of every individual to find out the kind of person he or she really is and to strive to become that person.\" In a speech given to the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights in 1898, Ibsen insisted that he \"must disclaim the honor of having consciously worked for the women's rights movement,\" since he wrote \"without any conscious thought of making propaganda,\" his task having been \"the \"description of humanity\".\"\n\nBecause of the departure from traditional behavior and theatrical convention involved in Nora's leaving home, her act of slamming the door as she leaves has come to represent the play itself. One critic noted, \"That slammed door reverberated across the roof of the world.\"\n\n\"A Doll's House\" has been adapted for the cinema on many occasions, including:\n\n\n\n\n\nMerriam, Eve, After Nora Slammed the Door: From Doll's House to Paper Doll Lives? Merriam looks at the \" Women's Revolution\" in America. World Publishing Company, Cleveland, 1964.\n\n"}
{"id": "3146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3146", "title": "AIM-7 Sparrow", "text": "AIM-7 Sparrow\n\nThe AIM-7 Sparrow is an American, medium-range semi-active radar homing air-to-air missile operated by the United States Air Force, United States Navy and United States Marine Corps, as well as other various air forces and navies. Sparrow and its derivatives were the West's principal beyond visual range (BVR) air-to-air missile from the late 1950s until the 1990s. It remains in service, although it is being phased out in aviation applications in favor of the more advanced AIM-120 AMRAAM. The Self-Defence Forces of Japan also employ the Sparrow missile, though it is being phased out and replaced by the Mitsubishi AAM-4. NATO pilots use the brevity code Fox One in radio communication to signal launch of a Semi-Active Radar Homing Missile such as the Sparrow.\n\nThe Sparrow was used as the basis for a surface-to-air missile, the RIM-7 Sea Sparrow, which is used by a number of navies for air defense of their ships. Fired at low altitude and flying directly at its target though the lower atmosphere, the range of the missile in this role is greatly reduced. With the retirement of the Sparrow in the air-to-air role, a new version of the Sea Sparrow was produced to address this concern, producing the much larger and more capable RIM-162 ESSM.\n\n from a late-1940s United States Navy program to develop a guided rocket weapon for air-to-air use. In 1947 the Navy contracted Sperry to build a beam riding version of a standard HVAR, the standard unguided aerial rocket, under Project Hotshot. The weapon was initially dubbed KAS-1, then AAM-2, and, from 1948 on, AAM-N-2. The airframe was developed by Douglas Aircraft Company. The diameter of the HVAR proved to be inadequate for the electronics, leading Douglas to expand the missile's airframe to diameter. The prototype weapon began unpowered flight-tests in 1947, and made its first aerial interception in 1952.\n\nAfter a protracted development cycle the initial AAM-N-2 \"Sparrow\" entered limited operational service in 1954 with specially modified Skyknights all weather carrier night fighters. And in 1956, they were carried by the F3H-2M Demon and F7U Cutlass fighter aircraft. Compared to the modern versions, the Sparrow I was more streamlined and featured a bullet-shaped airframe with a long pointed nose.\n\nSparrow I was a limited and rather primitive weapon. The limitations of beam-riding guidance (which was slaved to an optical sight on single seater fighters and a radar with night fighters) restricted the missile to attacks against targets flying a straight course and made it essentially useless against a maneuvering target. Only about 2,000 rounds were produced to this standard.\n\nAs early as 1950 Douglas examined equipping the Sparrow with an active radar seeker, initially known as XAAM-N-2a \"Sparrow II, the original retroactively becoming Sparrow I\". In 1952 it was given the new code AAM-N-3. The active radar made the Sparrow II a \"fire and forget\" weapon, allowing several to be fired at separate targets at the same time.\n\nBy 1955 Douglas proposed going ahead with development, intending it to be the primary weapon for the F5D Skylancer interceptor. It was later selected, with some controversy, to be the primary weapon for the Canadian Avro Arrow supersonic interceptor, along with the new Astra fire-control system. For Canadian use and as a second source for US missiles, Canadair was selected to build the missiles in Quebec.\n\nThe small size of the missile forebody and the K-band AN/APQ-64-radar limited performance, and it was never able to work in testing. After considerable development and test firings in the U.S. and Canada, Douglas abandoned development in 1956. Canadair continued development until the Arrow was cancelled in 1959.\n\nA subvariant of the Sparrow I armed with the same nuclear warhead as the MB-1 Genie was proposed in 1958, but was cancelled shortly thereafter.\n\nConcurrently with the development of the Sparrow I, in 1951, Raytheon began work on the semi-active radar homing version of Sparrow family of missiles, the AAM-N-6 \"Sparrow III\". The first of these weapons entered United States Navy service in 1958.\n\nThe AAM-N-6a was similar to the -6, but used a new Thiokol liquid-fuel rocket engine for improved performance. It also included changes to the guidance electronics to make it effective at higher closing speeds. The -6a was also selected to arm the Air Force's \"F-110A Spectre\" (F-4 Phantom) fighters in 1962, known to them as the AIM-101. It entered production in 1959, with 7500 being built.\n\nAnother upgrade reverted to a Rocketdyne solid-fuel motor for the AAM-N-6b, which started production in 1963. The new motor significantly increased maximum range to for head-on attacks.\n\nDuring this year the Navy and Air Force agreed on standardized naming conventions for their missiles. The Sparrows became the AIM-7 series. The original Sparrow I and aborted Sparrow II became the AIM-7A and AIM-7B, despite both being out of service. The -6, -6a and -6B became the AIM-7C, AIM-7D and AIM-7E respectively.\n\n25,000 AIM-7Es were produced, and saw extensive use during the Vietnam War, where its performance was generally considered disappointing. The mixed results were a combination of reliability problems (exacerbated by the tropical climate), limited pilot training in fighter-to-fighter combat, and restrictive rules of engagement that generally prohibited BVR (beyond visual range) engagements. The P (kill probability) of the AIM-7E was less than 10%; US fighter pilots shot down 59 aircraft out of the 612 Sparrows fired. Of the 612 AIM-7D/E/E-2 missiles fired, 97 (or 15.8%) hit their targets, resulting in 56 (or 9.2%) kills. Two kills were obtained beyond visual range.\n\nIn 1969 an improved version, the E-2, was introduced with clipped wings and various changes to the fuzing. Considered a \"dogfight Sparrow\", the AIM-7E-2 was intended to be used at shorter ranges where the missile was still travelling at high speeds, and in the head-on aspect, making it much more useful in the visual limitations imposed on the engagements. Even so, its kill rate was only 13% in combat, leading to a practice of ripple-firing all four at once in hopes of increasing kill probability. Its worst tendency was that of detonating prematurely, approximately a thousand feet in front of the launching aircraft, but it also had many motor failures, erratic flights, and fuzing problems. An E-3 version included additional changes to the fuzing, and an E-4 featured a modified seeker for use with the F-14 Tomcat.\n\nImproved versions of the AIM-7 were developed in the 1970s in an attempt to address the weapon's limitations. The AIM-7F, which entered service in 1976, had a dual-stage rocket motor for longer range, solid-state electronics for greatly improved reliability, and a larger warhead. Even this version had room for improvement, leading British Aerospace and the Italian firm Alenia to develop advanced versions of Sparrow with better performance and improved electronics as the BAe Skyflash and Alenia Aspide, respectively.\n\nThe most common version of the Sparrow today, the AIM-7M, entered service in 1982 and featured a new inverse monopulse seeker (matching the capabilities of Skyflash), active radar fuse, digital controls, improved ECM resistance, and better low-altitude performance. It was used to good advantage in the 1991 Gulf War, where it scored many USAF air-to-air kills. Of 44 missiles fired, 30 (68.2%) hit their intended targets resulting in 24/26 (54.5%/59.1%) kills. 19 kills were obtained beyond visual range.\n\nThe AIM-7P is similar in most ways to the M versions, and was primarily an upgrade program for existing M-series missiles. The main changes were to the software, improving low-level performance. A follow-on Block II upgrade added a new rear receiver allowing the missile to receive mid-course correction from the launching aircraft. Plans initially called for all M versions to be upgraded, but currently P's are being issued as required to replace M's lost or removed from the inventory.\n\nThe final version of the missile was to have been the AIM-7R, which added an infrared homing seeker to an otherwise unchanged AIM-7P Block II. A general wind-down of the budget led to it being cancelled in 1997.\n\nSparrow is now being phased out with the availability of the active-radar AIM-120 AMRAAM, but is likely to remain in service for several years.\n\nAs part of the Avro Canada CF-105 Arrow program, Canadair (now Bombardier) partnered with Douglas Aircraft Company in the development of the Sparrow II (AAM-N-3/AIM-7B). After Douglas dropped out of this program, Canadair continued on with it until the termination of the Arrow project.\n\nThe AAM-N-3 Sparrow II was unique in that it had a fully active radar guidance system. This combined both a radar transmitter and receiver in the missile, making it unnecessary for the pilot to keep the aircraft aimed at the target after firing the missile, unlike SARH (semi-active radar homing) missiles which require continuous radar-assisted guidance throughout flight. This allowed the aircraft that fired the AAM-N-3 to turn away, prosecute other targets, and/or escape from potential retaliatory missiles fired by the enemy aircraft during the time it takes for the sparrow to reach its target. Despite the significant advantages of this design over SARH, all subsequent models of the Sparrow use semi-active radar homing and GPS.\n\nTo accommodate the active radar guidance system, the AAM-N-3 Sparrow II had a much greater volume than its predecessor. Its size would subsequently set the precedent for all future Sparrow variants.\n\nIn 1959, Canadair had completed five missiles based on airframes from Douglas, and built two models from scratch, when the program was cancelled with the cancellation of the Arrow.\n\nSkyguard I is an anti-aircraft system, utilizing ground based AIM-7 Sparrow launchers.\n\nThe Italian company Finmeccanica (now Leonardo S.p.A.), Alenia Difesa licensed the AIM-7E Sparrow technology from the US, and produced its own improved version called Aspide.\n\nThe LY-60/FD-60/PL-10 is a family of PRC missiles developed by the Shanghai Academy of Science and Technology, largely based on the Italian Aspide missile - a version of the Sparrow. There are four versions of the basic design, three of which are surface-to-air and one air-to-air.\n\nThe Soviet Union acquired an AIM-7 in 1968 and a Vympel team started copying it as the K-25. The missile did not enter production as the R-23 was perceived to have better versatility, range, signal processing logic and immunity from interference. K-25 work ended in 1971, but analysis of the Sparrow was later used to inform the design of the Vympel R-27, particularly the servomechanisms and movable wings.\n\nBritish Aerospace (BAe) licensed the AIM-7E2 technology in the 1970s, producing the Skyflash missile. Skyflash used a Marconi XJ521 monopulse Semi-Active seeker together with improvements to the electronics. It was powered by the Aerojet Mk52 mod 2 rocket engine (later by the Rocketdyne Mk38 mod 4). Skyflash entered service with the Royal Air Force (RAF) on their Phantom FG.1/FGR.2 in 1978, and later on the Tornado F3. Skyflash was also exported to Sweden for use on their Viggen fighters.\n\nAn upgraded version with active radar seeker, called Active Sky Flash was proposed by BAe and Thomson-CSF, but did not receive funding because the RAF opted for other missiles.\n\nThe Sparrow has four major sections: guidance section, warhead, control, and rocket motor (currently the Hercules MK-58 solid-propellant rocket motor). It has a cylindrical body with four wings at mid-body and four tail fins. Although the external dimensions of the Sparrow remained relatively unchanged from model to model, the internal components of newer missiles represent major improvements, with vastly increased capabilities. The warhead is of the continuous-rod type.\n\nAs with other semi-active radar guided missiles, the missile does not generate radar signals, but instead homes in on reflected continuous-wave signals from the launch platform's radar. The receiver also senses the guidance radar to enable comparisons that enhance the missile's resistance to passive jamming.\n\nThe launching aircraft will illuminate the target with its radar. In radars of the 1950s these were single target tracking devices using a nutating horn as part of the antenna. This caused the beam to be swept in a small cone. Signal processing would be applied to determine the direction of maximum illumination and so develop a signal to steer the antenna toward the target. The missile detects the reflected signal from the target with a high gain antenna in a similar fashion and steers the entire missile toward closure with the target. The missile guidance also samples a portion of the illuminating signal via rearward pointing waveguides. The comparison of these two signals enabled logic circuits to determine the true target reflection signal, even if the target were to eject radar-reflecting chaff.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3147", "title": "AIM-120 AMRAAM", "text": "AIM-120 AMRAAM\n\nThe AIM-120 Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile, or AMRAAM (pronounced \"am-ram\"), is a modern beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile (BVRAAM) capable of all-weather day-and-night operations. Designed with 7-inch diameter instead of 8-inch diameter form-and-fit factors, and employing active transmit-receive radar guidance instead of semi-active receive-only radar guidance, it has the advantage of being a fire-and-forget weapon when compared to the previous generation Sparrow missiles. When an AMRAAM missile is being launched, NATO pilots use the brevity code Fox Three.\n\nThe AIM-7 Sparrow medium range missile (MRM) was purchased by the US Navy from original developer Howard Hughes in the 1950s as its first operational air-to-air missile with \"beyond visual range\" (BVR) capability. With an effective range of about , it was introduced as a radar beam-riding missile and then it was improved to a semiactive radar guided missile which would home in on reflections from a target illuminated by the radar of the launching aircraft. It was effective at visual to beyond visual range. The early beam riding versions of the Sparrow missiles were integrated onto the F3H Demon and F7U Cutlass, but the definitive AIM-7 Sparrow was the primary weapon for the all-weather F-4 Phantom II fighter/interceptor, which lacked an internal gun in its U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, and early U.S. Air Force versions. The F-4 carried up to four AIM-7s in built-in recesses under its belly.\n\nAlthough designed for use against non-maneuvering targets such as bombers, because of poor performance against fighters over North Vietnam, these missiles were progressively improved until they proved highly effective in dogfights. Together with the short-range, infrared-guided AIM-9 Sidewinder, they replaced the AIM-4 Falcon IR and radar guided series for use in air combat by the USAF as well. A disadvantage to semi-active homing was that only one target could be illuminated by the launching fighter plane at a time. Also, the launching aircraft had to remain pointed in the direction of the target (within the azimuth and elevation of its own radar set) which could be difficult or dangerous in air-to-air combat.\n\nAn active-radar variant called the Sparrow II was developed to address these drawbacks, but the U.S. Navy pulled out of the project in 1956. The Royal Canadian Air Force, which took over development in the hopes of using the missile to arm their prospective CF-105 Arrow interceptor, soon followed in 1958. The electronics of the time simply could not be miniaturized enough to make Sparrow II a viable working weapon. It would take decades, and a new generation of digital electronics, to produce an effective active-radar air-to-air missile as compact as the Sparrow.\n\nThe US Navy later developed the AIM-54 Phoenix long-range missile (LRM) for the fleet air defense mission. It was a large , Mach 5 missile designed to counter cruise missiles and the bombers that launched them. Originally intended for the straight-wing Douglas F6D Missileer and then the navalized version of the F-111B, it finally saw service with the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, the only fighter capable of carrying such a heavy missile. Phoenix was the first US fire-and-forget, multiple-launch, radar-guided missile: one which used its own active guidance system to guide itself without help from the launch aircraft when it closed on its target. This, in theory, gave a Tomcat with a six-Phoenix load the unprecedented capability of tracking and destroying up to six targets beyond visual range, as far as away—the only US fighter with such capability.\n\nA full load of six Phoenix missiles and its dedicated launcher exceeded a typical Vietnam-era bomb load. Its service in the US Navy was primarily as a deterrent, as its use was hampered by restrictive rules of engagement in conflicts such as Operations Desert Storm, Southern Watch, and Iraqi Freedom. The US Navy retired the Phoenix in 2004 in light of availability of the AIM-120 AMRAAM on the F/A-18 Hornet and the pending retirement of the F-14 Tomcat from active service in late 2006.\n\nThe Department of Defense conducted an extensive evaluation of air combat tactics and missile technology from 1974 to 1978 at Nellis AFB using the F-14 Tomcat and F-15 Eagle equipped with Sparrow and Sidewinder missiles as the blue force and aggressor F-5E aircraft equipped with AIM-9L all-aspect Sidewinders as the red force. This joint test and evaluation (JT&E) was designated Air Combat Evaluation/Air Intercept Missile Evaluation (ACEVAL/AIMVAL). A principal finding was that the necessity to produce illumination for the Sparrow until impact resulted in the red force's being able to launch their all-aspect Sidewinders before impact, resulting in mutual kills. What was needed was Phoenix-type multiple-launch and terminal active capability in a Sparrow-size airframe. This led to a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with European allies (principally the UK and Germany for development) for the US to develop an advanced, medium-range, air-to-air missile with the USAF as lead service. The MOA also assigned responsibility for development of an advanced, short-range, air-to-air missile to the European team; this would become the British ASRAAM.\n\nBy the 1990s, the reliability of the Sparrow had improved so much from the dismal days of Vietnam that it accounted for the largest number of aerial targets destroyed in Desert Storm. But while the USAF had passed on the Phoenix and their own similar AIM-47/YF-12 to optimize dogfight performance, they still needed a multiple-launch fire-and-forget capability for the F-15 and F-16. AMRAAM would need to be fitted on fighters as small as the F-16, and fit in the same spaces that were designed to fit the Sparrow on the F-4 Phantom. The European partners needed AMRAAM to be integrated on aircraft as small as the Sea Harrier. The US Navy needed AMRAAM to be carried on the F/A-18 Hornet and wanted capability for two to be carried on a launcher that normally carried one Sparrow to allow for more air-to-ground weapons.\n\nThe AMRAAM became one of the primary air-to-air weapons of the new F-22 Raptor fighter, which needed to place all of its weapons into internal weapons bays in order to help achieve an extremely low radar cross-section.\n\nAMRAAM was developed as the result of an agreement (the Family of Weapons MOA, no longer in effect by 1990), among the United States and several other NATO nations to develop air-to-air missiles and to share production technology. Under this agreement the U.S. was to develop the next generation medium range missile (AMRAAM) and Europe would develop the next generation short range missile (ASRAAM). Although Europe initially adopted the AMRAAM, an effort to develop the Meteor (missile), a competitor to AMRAAM, was begun in Great Britain. Eventually the ASRAAM was developed solely by the British, but using another source for its infrared seeker. After protracted development, the deployment of AMRAAM (AIM-120A) began in September 1991 in US Air Force F-15 Eagle fighter squadrons. The US Navy soon followed (in 1993) in its F/A-18 Hornet squadrons.\n\nThe eastern counterpart of AMRAAM is the somewhat similar Russian Air Force AA-12 \"Adder\", sometimes referred to in the West as the \"AMRAAMski.\" Likewise, France began its own air-to-air missile development with the MICA concept that used a common airframe for separate radar-guided and infrared-guided versions.\n\nAMRAAM has an all-weather, beyond-visual-range (BVR) capability. It improves the aerial combat capabilities of US and allied aircraft to meet the threat of enemy air-to-air weapons as they existed in 1991. AMRAAM serves as a follow-on to the AIM-7 Sparrow missile series. The new missile is faster, smaller, and lighter, and has improved capabilities against low-altitude targets. It also incorporates a datalink to guide the missile to a point where its active radar turns on and makes terminal intercept of the target. An inertial reference unit and micro-computer system makes the missile less dependent upon the fire-control system of the aircraft.\n\nOnce the missile closes in on the target, its active radar guides it to intercept. This feature, known as \"fire-and-forget\", frees the aircrew from the need to further provide guidance, enabling the aircrew to aim and fire several missiles simultaneously at multiple targets and perform evasive maneuvers while the missiles guide themselves to the targets.\n\nThe missile also features the ability to \"Home on Jamming,\" giving it the ability to switch over from active radar homing to passive homing – homing on jamming signals from the target aircraft. Software on board the missile allows it to detect if it is being jammed, and guide on its target using the proper guidance system.\n\nAMRAAM uses two-stage guidance when fired at long range. The aircraft passes data to the missile just before launch, giving it information about the location of the target aircraft from the launch point and its direction and speed. The missile uses this information to fly on an interception course to the target using its built-in inertial navigation system (INS). This information is generally obtained using the launching aircraft's radar, although it could come from an Infra-red search and track system, from a data link from another fighter aircraft, or from an AWACS aircraft.\n\nAfter launch, if the firing aircraft or surrogate continues to track the target, periodic updates—such as changes in the target's direction and speed—are sent from the launch aircraft to the missile, allowing the missile to adjust its course, via actuation of the rear fins, so that it is able to close to a self-homing distance where it will be close enough to \"catch\" the target aircraft in the \"basket\" (the missile's radar field of view in which it will be able to lock onto the target aircraft, unassisted by the launch aircraft).\n\nNot all armed services using the AMRAAM have elected to purchase the mid-course update option, which limits AMRAAM's effectiveness in some scenarios. The RAF initially opted not to use mid-course update for its Tornado F3 force, only to discover that without it, testing proved the AMRAAM was less effective in beyond visual range (BVR) engagements than the older semi-active radar homing BAE Skyflash weapon—the AIM-120's own radar is necessarily of limited range and power compared to that of the launch aircraft.\n\nOnce the missile closes to self-homing distance, it turns on its active radar seeker and searches for the target aircraft. If the target is in or near the expected location, the missile will find it and guide itself to the target from this point. If the missile is fired at short range, within visual range (WVR) or the near BVR, it can use its active seeker just after launch, making the missile truly \"fire and forget\". \n\nApart from the slave mode, there is a free guidance mode, called boresight. This mode is radar guidance-free, the missile just fires and locks the first thing it sees. This mode can be used for defensive shot, i.e. when the enemy has numerical superiority.\n\nThe kill probability (P) is determined by several factors, including aspect (head-on interception, side-on or tail-chase), altitude, the speed of the missile and the target, and how hard the target can turn. Typically, if the missile has sufficient energy during the terminal phase, which comes from being launched at close range to the target from an aircraft with an altitude and speed advantage, it will have a good chance of success. This chance drops as the missile is fired at longer ranges as it runs out of overtake speed at long ranges, and if the target can force the missile to turn it might bleed off enough speed that it can no longer chase the target. Operationally, the missile, which was designed for beyond visual range combat, has a P of 61.1% (18 missiles for 11 kills). The targets included six MiG-29s, a MiG-25, a MiG-23, a Su-22, a Galeb and a US Army Blackhawk that was targeted by mistake.\n\nThere are currently four main variants of AMRAAM, all in service with the United States Air Force, United States Navy, and the United States Marine Corps. The AIM-120A is no longer in production and shares the enlarged wings and fins with the successor AIM-120B. The AIM-120C has smaller \"clipped\" aerosurfaces to enable internal carriage on the USAF F-22 Raptor. AIM-120B deliveries began in 1994.\n\nThe AIM-120C deliveries began in 1996. The C-variant has been steadily upgraded since it was introduced. The AIM-120C-6 contained an improved fuse (Target Detection Device) compared to its predecessor. The AIM-120C-7 development began in 1998 and included improvements in homing and greater range (actual amount of improvement unspecified). It was successfully tested in 2003 and is currently being produced for both domestic and foreign customers. It helped the U.S. Navy replace the F-14 Tomcats with F/A-18E/F Super Hornets – the loss of the F-14's long-range AIM-54 Phoenix missiles (already retired) is offset with a longer-range AMRAAM-D. The lighter weight of the advanced AMRAAM enables an F/A-18E/F pilot greater bring-back weight upon carrier landings.\n\nThe AIM-120D is an upgraded version of the AMRAAM with improvements in almost all areas, including 50% greater range (than the already-extended range AIM-120C-7) and better guidance over its entire flight envelope yielding an improved kill probability (P). Raytheon began testing the D model on August 5, 2008, the company reported that an AIM-120D launched from an F/A-18F Super Hornet passed within lethal distance of a QF-4 target drone at the White Sands Missile Range.\n\nThe AIM-120D (P3I Phase 4, formerly known as AIM-120C-8) is a development of the AIM-120C with a two-way data link, more accurate navigation using a GPS-enhanced IMU, an expanded no-escape envelope, and improved HOBS (High-Angle Off-Boresight) capability. The AIM-120D is a joint USAF/USN project, and is currently in the testing phase. The USN was scheduled to field it from 2014, and AIM-120D will be carried by all Pacific carrier groups by 2020, although the 2013 sequestration cuts could push back this later date to 2022. The Royal Australian Air Force requested 450 AIM-120D missiles, which would make it the first foreign operator of the missile. The procurement, approved by the US Government in April 2016, will cost $1.1 billion and will be integrated for use on the F/A-18F Super Hornet, EA-18G Growler and the F-35 Lightning II aircraft.\n\nThere are also plans for Raytheon to develop a ramjet-powered derivative of the AMRAAM, the Future Medium Range Air-Air Missile (FMRAAM). It is not known whether the FMRAAM will be produced since the target market, the British Ministry of Defence, has chosen the Meteor missile over the FMRAAM for a BVR missile for the Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft.\n\nRaytheon is also working with the Missile Defense Agency to develop the Network Centric Airborne Defense Element (NCADE), an anti-ballistic missile derived from the AIM-120. This weapon will be equipped with a Ramjet engine and an infrared homing seeker derived from the Sidewinder missile. In place of a proximity-fused warhead, the NCADE will use a kinetic energy hit-to-kill vehicle based on the one used in the Navy's RIM-161 Standard Missile 3.\n\nThe −120A and −120B models are currently nearing the end of their service life while the −120D variant has just entered full production. AMRAAM was due to be replaced by the USAF, the U.S. Navy, and the U.S. Marine Corps after 2020 by the Joint Dual Role Air Dominance Missile (Next Generation Missile). This was unexpectedly terminated in the 2013 budget plan, and so the future replacement is uncertain.\n\nRaytheon successfully tested launching AMRAAM missiles from a five-missile carrier on a M1097 Humvee. This system will be known as the SLAMRAAM (Surface Launched (SL) and AMRAAM). They receive their initial guidance information from a radar not mounted on the vehicle. Since the missile is launched without the benefit of an aircraft's speed or high altitude, its range is considerably shorter. Raytheon is currently marketing an SL-AMRAAM EX, purported to be an extended range AMRAAM and bearing a resemblance to the RIM-162 ESSM.\n\nThe Norwegian Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS), developed by Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace, consists of a number of vehicle-pulled launch batteries (containing six AMRAAMs each) along with separate radar trucks and control station vehicles. A more recent version of the program is the \"High Mobility Launcher\", made in cooperation with Raytheon (Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace was already a subcontractor on the SLAMRAAM system), where the launch-vehicle is a Humvee (M1152A1 HMMWV), containing four AMRAAMs each.\n\nWhile still under evaluation for replacement of current US Army assets, the SL-AMRAAM has been deployed in several nations' military forces. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has requested the purchasing of SL-AMRAAM as part of a larger 7 billion dollar foreign military sales package. The sale would include 288 AMRAAM C-7 missiles.\n\nThe US Army has test fired the SL-AMRAAM from a HIMARS artillery rocket launcher as a common launcher, as part of a move to switch to a larger and more survivable launch platform.\n\nOn January 6, 2011, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced that the U.S. Army has decided to terminate acquisition of the SLAMRAAM as part of a budget-cutting effort.\n\nThe National Guard Association of the United States has sent a letter asking for the United States Senate to stop the Army's plan to drop the SLAMRAAM program because without it there would be no path to modernize the Guard's AN/TWQ-1 Avenger Battalions.\n\nOn February 22, 2015 Raytheon announced an Extended Range upgrade to NASAMS-launched AMRAAM, calling it AMRAAM-ER. This combines the AMRAAM seeker with the ESSM rocket motor.\n\nThe AMRAAM was used for the first time on December 27, 1992, when a USAF F-16D shot down an Iraqi MiG-25 that violated the southern no-fly-zone. Interestingly, this missile had been returned from the flight line as defective a day earlier. AMRAAM gained a second victory in January 1993 when an Iraqi MiG-23 was shot down by a USAF F-16C.\n\nThe third combat use of the AMRAAM was in 1994, when a Republika Srpska Air Force J-21 Jastreb aircraft was shot down by a USAF F-16C that was patrolling the UN-imposed no-fly zone over Bosnia. In that engagement, at least three other Serbian aircraft were shot down by USAF F-16C fighters using AIM-9 missiles (see Banja Luka incident for more details). At that point, three launches in combat had resulted in three kills, resulting in the AMRAAM's being informally named \"slammer\" in the second half of the 1990s.\n\nIn 1998 and 1999 AMRAAMs were again fired by USAF F-15 fighters at Iraqi aircraft violating the No-Fly-Zone, but this time they failed to hit their targets. During the spring of 1999, AMRAAMs saw their main combat action during Operation Allied Force, the Kosovo bombing campaign. Six Serbian MiG-29 were shot down by NATO (4 USAF F-15C, 1 USAF F-16C, 1 Dutch F-16A MLU), all of them using AIM-120 missiles (the kill by the F-16C may have happened due to friendly fire, from SA-7 MANPAD fired by Serbian infantry).\n\nOn 18 June 2017, a US F/A-18E Super Hornet engaged and shot down a SyAAF Su-22, using an AIM-120.\n\nAs of 2017, the AIM-120 AMRAAM has shot down ten aircraft (six MiG-29s, one MiG-25, one MiG-23, one Su-22, and one Soko J-21 Jastreb). An AMRAAM was also involved in a friendly fire incident in 1994 when F-15 fighters patrolling Iraq's Northern No-Fly Zone inadvertently shot down a pair of U.S. Army Black Hawk helicopters.\n\nSince 2007 Raytheon has continued to slip on AMRAAM deliveries, leading the USAF to withhold $621 million in 2012 on account of 193 missiles not delivered.\n\nCanadair, now Bombardier, had largely helped with the development of the AIM-7 Sparrow and Sparrow II, and assisted to a less extent in the AIM-120 development. Canada had placed an order for 256 AIM-120's, but cancelled half of them after engine ignition problems due to cold weather conditions. The AIM-9X & AIM-7 were ordered as replacements.\n\nIn early 1995 South Korea ordered 88 AIM-120A missiles for its KF-16 fleet. In 1997 South Korea ordered additional 737 AIM-120B missiles.\n\nIn 2006 Poland received AIM-120C-5 missiles to arm its new F-16C/D Block 52+ fighters.\n\nIn early 2006, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) ordered 500 AIM-120C-5 AMRAAM missiles as part of a $650 million F-16 ammunition deal to equip its F-16C/D Block 50/52+ and F-16A/B Block 15 MLU fighters. The PAF got the first three F-16C/D Block 50/52+ aircraft on July 3, 2010 and first batch of AMRAAMs on July 26, 2010.\n\nIn 2007, the United States government agreed to sell 218 AIM-120C-7 missiles to Taiwan as part of a large arms sales package that also included 235 AGM-65G-2 Maverick missiles. Total value of the package, including launchers, maintenance, spare parts, support and training rounds, was estimated at around US$421 million. This supplemented an earlier Taiwanese purchase of 120 AIM-120C-5 missiles a few years ago.\n\n2008 has brought announcements of new or additional sales to Singapore, Finland, Morocco and South Korea; in December 2010 the Swiss government requested 150 AIM-120C-7 missiles. Sales to Finland have stalled, because the manufacturer has not been able to fix a mysterious bug that causes the rocket motors of the missile to fail in cold tests. In May 5, 2015, the State Department has made a determination approving a possible Foreign Military Sale to Royal Malaysian Air Force for AIM-120C7 AMRAAM Missiles and associated equipment, parts and logistical support for an estimated cost of $21 million.\n\nIn March 2016, the US government approved the sales of AIM-120C-7 missiles to the Indonesian Air Force to equip their fleet of F-16 C/D Block 32+.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3149", "title": "AGM-88 HARM", "text": "AGM-88 HARM\n\nThe AGM-88 High-speed Anti-Radiation Missile (HARM) is a tactical, air-to-surface missile designed to home in on electronic transmissions coming from surface-to-air radar systems. It was originally developed by Texas Instruments as a replacement for the AGM-45 Shrike and AGM-78 Standard ARM system. Production was later taken over by Raytheon Corporation when it purchased the defense production business of Texas Instruments.\n\nThe AGM-88 can detect, attack and destroy a radar antenna or transmitter with minimal aircrew input. The proportional guidance system that homes in on enemy radar emissions has a fixed antenna and seeker head in the missile's nose. A smokeless, solid-propellant, booster-sustainer rocket motor propels the missile at speeds over Mach 2. HARM, a U.S. Navy-led program, was initially integrated onto the A-6E, A-7 and F/A-18 and later onto the EA-6B. RDT&E for use on the F-14 was begun, but not completed. The USAF introduced HARM on the F-4G Wild Weasel and later on specialized F-16s equipped with the HARM Targeting System (HTS).\n\nThe HARM missile was approved for full production in March 1983, obtained initial operating capability (IOC) on the A-7E Corsair II in late 1983 and then deployed in late 1985 with VA-46 aboard the aircraft carrier USS \"America\". In 1986 the first successful firing of the HARM from an EA-6B was performed by VAQ-131. It was soon used in combat—in March 1986 against a Libyan SA-5 site in the Gulf of Sidra, and then Operation Eldorado Canyon in April. HARM was used extensively by the United States Navy and the United States Air Force for Operation Desert Storm during the Gulf War of 1991.\n\nDuring the Gulf War, the HARM was involved in a friendly fire incident when the pilot of an F-4G Wild Weasel escorting a B-52 bomber mistook the latter's tail gun radar for an Iraqi AAA site. (This was after the tail gunner of the B-52 had targeted the F-4G, mistaking it for an Iraqi MiG.) The F-4 pilot launched the missile and then saw that the target was the B-52, which was hit. It survived with shrapnel damage to the tail and no casualties. The B-52 was subsequently renamed \"In HARM's Way\".\n\n\"Magnum\" is spoken over the radio to announce the launch of an AGM-88. During the Gulf War, if an aircraft was illuminated by enemy radar a bogus \"Magnum\" call on the radio was often enough to convince the operators to power down.\nThis technique would also be employed in Serbia during air operations in 1999.\n\nIn 2013 President Obama offered the AGM-88 to Israel for the first time.\n\nThe newest upgrade, the \"AGM-88E Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM),\" features the latest software, enhanced capabilities intended to counter radar shutdown and passive radar using an additional active millimeter wave seeker. It was released in November 2010 and is a joint venture by the US Department of Defense and the Italian Ministry of Defense and is produced by Alliant Techsystems.\n\nIn November 2005, the Italian Ministry of Defense and the US Department of Defense signed a Memorandum of Agreement on the joint development of the AGM-88E AARGM missile. Italy was providing $20 million of developmental funding as well as several millions worth of material, equipment and related services. The Italian Air Force was expected to procure up to 250 missiles for its Tornado ECR aircraft. Thus flight test program was set to integrate the AARGM onto Tornado ECR's weapon system.<br>\nThe Navy demonstrated the AARGM's capability during Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) in spring 2012 with live firing of 12 missiles. Aircrew and maintenance training with live missiles was completed in June.\n\nThe Navy authorized Full-Rate Production (FRP) of the AARGM in August 2012, with 72 missiles for the Navy and nine for the Italian Air Force to be delivered in 2013. A U.S. Marine Corps F/A-18 Hornet squadron will be the first forward-deployed unit with the AGM-88E.\n\nIn September 2013, ATK delivered the 100th AARGM to the U.S. Navy. The AGM-88E program is on schedule and on budget, with Full Operational Capability (FOC) planned for September 2014. The AGM-88E was designed to improve the effectiveness of legacy HARM variants against fixed and relocatable radar and communications sites, particularly those that would shut down to throw off anti-radiation missiles, by attaching a new seeker to the existing Mach 2-capable rocket motor and warhead section, adding a passive anti-radiation homing receiver, satellite and inertial navigation system, a millimeter wave radar for terminal guidance, and the ability to beam up images of the target via a satellite link just seconds before impact.\n\nIt will be initially integrated onto the F/A-18C/D, F/A-18E/F, EA-18G, and Tornado ECR aircraft and later on the F-35.\n\nThe Navy's FY 2016 budget included funding for an extended range AARGM-ER that utilizes the existing guidance system and warhead of the AGM-88E with a solid integrated rocket-ramjet for double the range. Development funding will last to 2020.\n\nOn September 2016, Orbital ATK has lifted the veil on its extended-range variant of the AGM-88E or AARGM-ER, which incorporates a redesigned control section and 11.5 in.-dia. rocket motor for twice the range and internal carriage on the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II.\n\nIn September 2015, the AGM-88E successfully hit a mobile ship target in a live-fire test, demonstrating the missile's ability to use anti-radiation homing and millimeter wave radar to detect, identify, locate, and engage moving targets.\n\nAlthough the U.S. chose the Orbital ATK-produced AGM-88E, Raytheon created their own version of the AARGM called the AGM-88F HARM Control Section Modification (HCSM) that incorporates similar upgrade features, which could allow the company to offer their missile for export.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3151", "title": "AGM-65 Maverick", "text": "AGM-65 Maverick\n\nThe AGM-65 Maverick is an air-to-ground tactical missile (AGM) designed for close air support. It is the most widely produced precision-guided missile in the Western world, and is effective against a wide range of tactical targets, including armor, air defenses, ships, ground transportation and fuel storage facilities.\n\nOriginally designed and built by Hughes Missile Systems, development of the AGM-65 spanned from 1966 to 1972, after which it entered service with the United States Air Force in August 1972. Since then, it has been exported to more than 30 countries and is certified on 25 aircraft. The Maverick served during the Vietnam, Yom Kippur, Iran–Iraq, and Persian Gulf Wars, along with other smaller conflicts, destroying enemy forces and installations with varying degrees of success.\n\nSince its introduction into service, numerous Maverick versions had been designed and produced, using electro-optical, laser, charge-coupled device and infra-red guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warhead: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating.\n\nThe Maverick shares the same configuration as Hughes's AIM-4 Falcon and AIM-54 Phoenix, and measures more than in length and in diameter.\n\nThe Maverick's development history began in 1965, when the United States Air Force (USAF) began a program to develop a replacement to the AGM-12 Bullpup. With a range of , the radio-guided Bullpup was introduced in 1959 and was considered a \"silver bullet\" by operators. However, the launch aircraft was required to fly straight towards the target during the missile's flight instead of performing evasive maneuvers, thus risking the crew. Even when it hit, the small warhead was only useful against small targets like bunkers, when used against larger targets like the Thanh Hóa Bridge it did little other than char the structure. The USAF began a series of projects to replace Bullpup, both larger versions of Bullpup, models C and D, as well as a series of Bullpup adaptations offering fire-and-forget guidance. Among the later were the AGM-83 Bulldog, AGM-79 Blue Eye. and AGM-80 Viper.\n\nFrom 1966 to 1968, Hughes Missile Systems Division and Rockwell competed for the contract to build an entirely new fire-and-forget missile with far greater range performance than any of the Bullpup versions. Each were allocated $3 million for preliminary design and engineering work of the Maverick in 1966. In 1968, Hughes emerged with the $95 million contract for further development and testing of the missile; at the same time, contract options called for 17,000 missiles to be procured. Hughes conducted a smooth development of the AGM-65 Maverick, with the first unguided test launch from a F-4 on 18 September 1969, with the first guided test on 18 December successfully performing a direct hit on a M41 tank target at the Air Force Missile Development Center at Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico.\n\nIn July 1971, the USAF and Hughes signed a $69.9 million contract for 2,000 missiles, the first of which was delivered in 1972. Although early operational results were favorable, military planners predicted that the Maverick would fare less successfully in the hazy conditions of Central Europe, where it would have been used against Warsaw Pact forces. As such, development of the AGM-65B began in 1975 before it was delivered during the late 1970s. When production of the AGM-65A/B was ended in 1978, more than 35,000 missiles had been built.\n\nMore versions of the Maverick appeared, among which was the laser-guided AGM-65C/E. Development of the AGM-65C started in 1978 by Rockwell, who built a number of development missiles for the USAF. Due to high cost, the version was not procured by the USAF, and instead entered service with the United States Marine Corps (USMC) as the AGM-65E.\n\nAnother major development was the AGM-65D, which employed an imaging infrared (IIR) seeker. By imaging on radiated heat, the IIR is all-weather operable as well as showing improved performance in acquiring and tracking the hot engines, such as in tanks and trucks, that were to be one of its major missions. The seekerhead mechanically scanned the scene over a nitrogen-cooled 4-by-4 pixel array using a series of mirrored facets machined into the inner surface of the ring-shaped main gyroscope. The five-year development period of the AGM-65D started in 1977 and ended with the first delivery to the USAF in October 1983. The version received initial operating capability in February 1986.\n\nThe AGM-65F is a hybrid Maverick combining the AGM-65D's IIR seeker and warhead and propulsion components of the AGM-65E. Deployed by the United States Navy (USN), the AGM-65F is optimized for maritime strike roles. The first AGM-65F launch from the P-3C took place in 1989, and in 1994, the USN awarded Unisys a contract to integrate the version with the P-3C. Meanwhile, Hughes produced the AGM-65G, which essentially has the same guidance system as the D, with some software modifications that track larger targets, coupled with a shaped-charge warhead.\n\nIn the mid-1990s to early 2000s, there were several ideas of enhancing the Maverick's potential. Among them was the stillborn plan to incorporate the Maverick millimeter wave active radar homing, which can determine the exact shape of a target. Another study called \"Longhorn Project\" was conducted by Hughes, and later Raytheon following the absorption of Hughes into Raytheon, looked a Maverick version equipped with turbojet engines instead of rocket motors. The \"Maverick ER\", as it was dubbed, would have a \"significant increase in range\" compared to the Maverick's current range of . The proposal was abandoned, but if the Maverick ER had entered production, it would have replaced the AGM-119B Penguin carried on the MH-60R.\nThe most modern versions of the Maverick are the AGM-65H/K, which were in production . The AGM-65H was developed by coupling the AGM-65B with a charge-coupled device (CCD) seeker optimized for desert operations and which has three times the range of the original TV-sensor; a parallel USN program aimed at rebuilding AGM-65Fs with newer CCD seekers resulted in the AGM-65J. The AGM-65K, meanwhile, was developed by replacing the AGM-65G's IR guidance system with an electro-optical television guidance system.\n\nThe Maverick has a modular design construction, allowing a different combination of the guidance package and warhead to be attached to the rocket motor section to produce a different weapon. It has long-chord delta wings and a cylindrical body, reminiscent of the AIM-4 Falcon and the AIM-54 Phoenix.\n\nDifferent models of the AGM-65 have used electro-optical, laser, and infra-red guidance systems. The AGM-65 has two types of warheads: one has a contact fuze in the nose, the other has a heavyweight warhead fitted with a delayed-action fuze, which penetrates the target with its kinetic energy before detonating. The latter is most effective against large, hard targets. The propulsion system for both types is a solid-fuel rocket motor behind the warhead.\n\nThe Maverick missile is unable to lock onto targets on its own; it has to be given input by the pilot or weapon systems officer (WSO) after which it follows the path to the target autonomously, allowing the WSO to fire and forget. In an A-10 Thunderbolt IIs, for example, the video fed from the seeker head is relayed to a screen in the cockpit, where the pilot can check the locked target of the missile before launch. A crosshair on the head-up display is shifted by the pilot to set the approximate target while the missile will then automatically recognize and lock on to the target. Once the missile is launched, it requires no further assistance from the launch vehicle and tracks its target automatically. This fire-and-forget property is not shared by the E version that uses semi-active laser homing.\n\n\nThe Maverick was declared operational on 30 August 1972 with the F-4D/Es and A-7s initially cleared for the type; the missile made its combat debut four months later with the USAF in the Vietnam War. During the Yom Kippur War in October 1973, the Israelis used Mavericks to destroy and disable enemy vehicles. Deployment of early versions of the Mavericks in these two wars were successful due to the favorable atmospheric conditions that suited the electro-optical TV seeker. Ninety-nine missiles were fired during the two wars, eighty-four of which were successful.\n\nIn June 1975, during a border confrontation, a formation of Iranian F4E Phantoms destroyed a group of Iraqi tanks by firing 12 Mavericks at them. Five years later, during Operation \"Pearl\" as part of the Iran–Iraq War, Iranian F-4s used Mavericks to sink three Osa II missile boats and four P-6 combat ships.\nDue to weapons embargoes, Iran had to equip its AH-1J SeaCobra helicopters with AGM-65 Maverick missiles and used them with some success in various operations such as Operation \"Undeniable Victory\" whereas Iranian AH-1J's fired 11 Mavericks.\n\nIn August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait. In early 1991, the US-led Coalition executed Operation \"Desert Storm\" during which Mavericks played a crucial role in the ousting of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Employed by F-15E Strike Eagles, F/A-18 Hornets, AV-8B Harriers, F-16 Fighting Falcons and A-10 Thunderbolt IIs, but used mainly by the last two, more than 5,000 Mavericks were deployed to attack armored targets. The most-used variant by the USAF was the IIR-guided AGM-65D. The reported hit rate by USAF Mavericks was 80–90%, while for the USMC it was 60%. The Maverick was used again in Iraq during the 2003 Iraq War, during which 918 were fired.\n\nThe first time the Maverick were fired from a Lockheed P-3 Orion at a hostile vessel was when the USN and coalition units came to the aid of Libyan rebels to engage the Libyan Coast Guard vessel \"Vittoria\" in the port of Misrata, Libya, during the late evening of 28 March 2011. \"Vittoria\" was engaged and fired upon by a USN P-3C Maritime Patrol aircraft with AGM-65 Maverick missiles.\n\nLAU-117 Maverick launchers have been used on USN, USAF, and USMC aircraft:\n\nThe Maverick has been exported to at least 35 countries:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "3152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3152", "title": "AIM-54 Phoenix", "text": "AIM-54 Phoenix\n\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix is a radar-guided, long-range air-to-air missile (AAM), carried in clusters of up to six missiles on the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, its only operational launch platform. The Phoenix was the United States' only long-range air-to-air missile. The combination of Phoenix missile and the AN/AWG-9 guidance radar was the first aerial weapons system that could simultaneously engage multiple targets. Both the missile and the aircraft were used by the United States Navy and are now retired, the AIM-54 Phoenix in 2004 and the F-14 in 2006. They were replaced by the shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAM, employed on the F/A-18 Hornet and F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. Following the retirement of the F-14 by the U.S. Navy, the weapon's only current operator is the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force. Brevity code \"Fox Three\" was used when firing the AIM-54.\n\nSince 1951, the Navy faced the initial threat from the Tupolev Tu-4K 'Bull' carrying anti-ship missiles. Eventually, during the height of the Cold War, the threat would have expanded into regimental-size raids of Tu-16 Badger and Tu-22M Backfire bombers equipped with low-flying, long-range, high-speed, nuclear-armed cruise missiles and considerable electronic countermeasures (ECM) of various types.\n\nThe Navy would require a long-range, long-endurance interceptor aircraft to defend carrier battle groups against this threat. The proposed F6D Missileer was intended to fulfill this mission and oppose the attack far from the fleet it was defending. The weapon needed for interceptor aircraft, the Bendix AAM-N-10 Eagle, was to be an air-to-air missile of unprecedented range when compared to contemporary AIM-7 Sparrow missiles. It would work together with Westinghouse AN/APQ-81 radar. The Missileer project was cancelled in December 1960.\n\nIn the early 1960s, the U.S. Navy made the next interceptor attempt with the F-111B, and they needed a new missile design. At the same time, the USAF canceled the projects for their land-based high-speed interceptor aircraft, the North American XF-108 Rapier and the Lockheed YF-12, and left the capable AIM-47 Falcon missile at a quite advanced stage of development, but with no effective launch platform.\n\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix, developed for the F-111B fleet air defense fighter, had an airframe with four cruciform fins that was a scaled-up version of the AIM-47. One characteristic of the Missileer ancestry was that the radar sent it mid-course corrections, which allowed the fire control system to \"loft\" the missile up over the target into thinner air where it had better range.\n\nThe F-111B was canceled in 1968. Its weapons system, the AIM-54 working with the AWG-9 radar, migrated to the new U.S. Navy fighter project, the VFX, which would later become the F-14 Tomcat.\n\nIn 1977, development of a significantly improved Phoenix version, the AIM-54C, was developed to better counter projected threats from tactical anti-naval aircraft and cruise missiles, and its final upgrade included a re-programmable memory capability to keep pace with emerging ECM.\n\nThe AIM-54/AWG-9 combination had multiple track capability (up to 24 targets) and launch (up to 6 Phoenixes can be launched nearly simultaneously); the large missile is equipped with a conventional warhead.\n\nOn the F-14, four missiles can be carried under the fuselage tunnel attached to special aerodynamic pallets, plus two under glove stations. A full load of 6 Phoenix missiles and the unique launch rails weighs in at over , about twice the weight of Sparrows, so it was more common to carry a mixed load of 4 Phoenix, 2 Sparrow, and 2 Sidewinder missiles.\n\nMost other US aircraft relied on the smaller, semi-active medium-range AIM-7 Sparrow. Semi-active guidance meant the aircraft no longer had a search capability while supporting the launched Sparrow, reducing situational awareness.\n\nThe Tomcat's radar could track up to 24 targets in track-while-scan mode, with the AWG-9 selecting up to 6 potential targets for the missiles. The pilot or radar intercept officer (RIO) could then launch the Phoenix missiles once parameters were met. The large tactical information display (TID) in the RIO's cockpit gave information to the aircrew (the pilot had the ability to monitor the RIO's display) and the radar could continually search and track multiple targets after Phoenix missiles were launched, thereby maintaining situational awareness of the battlespace.\n\nThe Link-4 datalink allowed US Navy Tomcats to share information with the E-2C Hawkeye AEW aircraft. During Desert Shield in 1990, the Link-4A was introduced; this allowed the Tomcats to have a fighter-to-fighter datalink capability, further enhancing overall situational awareness. The F-14D entered service with the JTIDS that brought the even better Link-16 datalink \"picture\" to the cockpit.\n\nThe Phoenix has several guidance modes and achieves its longest range by using mid-course updates from the F-14A/B AWG-9 radar (APG-71 radar in the F-14D) as it climbs to cruise between and at close to Mach 5. Phoenix uses this high altitude to gain gravitational potential energy, which is later converted into kinetic energy as the missile dives at high velocity towards its target. At around from the target, the missile activates its own radar to provide terminal guidance. Minimum engagement range for the Phoenix is around and active homing would initiate upon launch.\n\n\nThe AIM-54 Phoenix was retired from USN service on September 30, 2004. F-14 Tomcats were retired on September 22, 2006. They were replaced by shorter-range AIM-120 AMRAAMs, employed on the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet.\n\nDespite the much-vaunted capabilities, the Phoenix was rarely used in combat, with only two confirmed launches and no confirmed targets destroyed in US Navy service, though a large number of kills were claimed by Iranian F-14s during the Iran–Iraq War. The USAF F-15 Eagle had responsibility for overland combat air patrol duties in Operation Desert Storm in 1991, primarily because of the onboard F-15 IFF capabilities. The Tomcat did not have the requisite IFF capability mandated by the JFACC to satisfy the rules of engagement to utilize the Phoenix capability at beyond visual range. The AIM-54 was not adopted by any foreign nation besides Iran, or any other US armed service, and was not used on any aircraft other than the F-14.\n\nThere is very little information available regarding Iran's use of its 79 F-14A Tomcats (delivered prior to 1979) in most western outlets. The exception is a book released by Osprey Publishing titled \"Iranian F-14 Tomcats in Combat\" by Tom Cooper and Farzad Bishop. Most of the research contained in the book was based on pilot interviews. Reports vary on the use of the 285 missiles supplied to Iran, during the Iran–Iraq War, 1980–88.\n\nAccording to Cooper, the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force kept its F-14 fighters and AIM-54 missiles in regular use during the entire Iran–Iraq War, though periodic lack of spares grounded large parts of the fleet at times. During late 1987, the stock of AIM-54 missiles was at its lowest, with fewer than 50 operational missiles available. The missiles needed fresh thermal batteries that could only be purchased from the US. Iran found a clandestine buyer that supplied it with batteries—which cost up to US$10,000 each. Iran received spares and parts for both the F-14s and AIM-54s from various sources during the Iran–Iraq War, and has received more spares after the conflict. Iran started a program to build spares for the planes and missiles, and although there are claims that it no longer relies on outside sources to keep its F-14s and AIM-54s operational, there is evidence that Iran continues to procure parts clandestinely.\n\nBoth the F-14 Tomcat and AIM-54 Phoenix missile continue in the service of the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force. The operational abilities of these aircraft and missiles are questionable, since the US refused to supply spare parts and maintenance after the 1979 revolution, except for a brief period during the Iran-Contra Affair.\n\nIran claimed to be working on building an equivalent missile and in 2013 unveiled the Fakour-90, an upgraded and reverse-engineered version of the Phoenix.\n\n\nThere were also test, evaluation, ground training, and captive air training versions of the missile; designated ATM-54, AEM-54, DATM-54A, and CATM-54. The flight versions had A and C versions. The DATM-54 was not made in a C version as there was no change in the ground handling characteristics.\n\n\n\n\nThe following is a list of AIM-54 Phoenix specifications:\n\n"}
