{"id": "8824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8824", "title": "Division of labour", "text": "Division of labour\n\nThe division of labour is the separation of tasks in any system so that participants may specialize. Individuals, organizations, and nations are endowed with or acquire specialized capabilities and either form combinations or trade to take advantage of the capabilities of others in addition to their own. Specialized capabilities may include equipment or natural resources in addition to skills and training and complex combinations of such assets are often important, as when multiple items of specialized equipment and skilled operators are used to produce a single product. The division of labour is the motive for trade and the source of economic interdependence.\n\nBecause of the large amount of labour saved by giving workers specialized tasks in Industrial Revolution-era factories, some classical economists as well as some mechanical engineers such as Charles Babbage were proponents of division of labour. Also, having workers perform single or limited tasks eliminated the long training period required to train craftsmen, who were replaced with lesser paid but more productive unskilled workers. Historically, an increasing division of labour is associated with the growth of total output and trade, the rise of capitalism, and the increasing complexity of industrialised processes. The concept and implementation of division of labour has been observed in ancient Sumerian (Mesopotamian) culture, where assignment of jobs in some cities coincided with an increase in trade and economic interdependence. Division of labour generally also increases both producer and individual worker productivity.\n\nIn contrast to division of labour, division of work refers to the division of a large task, contract, or project into smaller tasks—each with a separate schedule within the overall project schedule. Division of labour, instead, refers to the allocation of tasks to individuals or organizations according to the skills and/or equipment those people or organizations possess. Often division of labour and division of work are both part of the economic activity within an industrial nation or organization.\n\nIn Plato's \"Republic\", the origin of the state lies in the natural inequality of humanity, which is embodied in the division of labour.\n\nSilvermintz notes that, \"Historians of economic thought credit Plato, primarily on account of arguments advanced in his Republic, as an early proponent of the division of labour.\" Notwithstanding this, Silvermintz argues that, \"While Plato recognizes both the economic and political benefits of the division of labour, he ultimately critiques this form of economic arrangement insofar as it hinders the individual from ordering his own soul by cultivating acquisitive motives over prudence and reason.\"\n\nXenophon, in the fourth century BC, makes a passing reference to division of labour in his 'Cyropaedia' (a.k.a. Education of Cyrus).\n\nThe 14th-century scholar Ibn Khaldun emphasised the importance of the division of labour in the production process. In his Muqaddimah, he states:\nSir William Petty was the first modern writer to take note of division of labour, showing its existence and usefulness in Dutch shipyards. Classically the workers in a shipyard would build ships as units, finishing one before starting another. But the Dutch had it organized with several teams each doing the same tasks for successive ships. People with a particular task to do must have discovered new methods that were only later observed and justified by writers on political economy.\n\nPetty also applied the principle to his survey of Ireland. His breakthrough was to divide up the work so that large parts of it could be done by people with no extensive training.\n\nBernard de Mandeville discusses the matter in the second volume of \"The Fable of the Bees\" (1714). This elaborates many matters raised by the original poem about a 'Grumbling Hive'. He says:\n\nIn his introduction to \"Art de l'Épinglier\" [The Art of the Pin-Maker] (1761), Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau writes about the \"division of this work\":\n\nBy \"division of this work\", Duhamel du Monceau is referring to the subdivisions of the text describing the various trades involved in the pin making activity; this can also be described as division of labour.\n\nIn the first sentence of \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\" (1776), Adam Smith foresaw the essence of industrialism by determining that division of labour represents a quantitative increase in productivity. Like du Monceau, his example was the making of pins. Unlike Plato, Smith famously argued that the difference between a street porter and a philosopher was as much a consequence of the division of labour as its cause. Therefore, while for Plato the level of specialization determined by the division of labour was externally determined, for Smith it was the dynamic engine of economic progress. However, in a further chapter of the same book Smith criticizes the division of labour saying it can lead to \"the almost entire corruption and degeneracy of the great body of the people. … unless government takes some pains to prevent it.\" The contradiction has led to some debate over Smith's opinion of the division of labour. Alexis de Tocqueville agreed with Smith: \"Nothing tends to materialize man, and to deprive his work of the faintest trace of mind, more than extreme division of labor.\" Adam Ferguson shared similar views to Smith, though was generally more negative.\n\nThe specialization and concentration of the workers on their single subtasks often leads to greater skill and greater productivity on their particular subtasks than would be achieved by the same number of workers each carrying out the original broad task.\n\nSmith saw the importance of matching skills with equipment – usually in the context of an organization. For example, pin makers were organized with one making the head, another the body, each using different equipment. Similarly he emphasised a large number of skills, used in cooperation and with suitable equipment, were required to build a ship.\n\nIn modern economic discussion, the term human capital would be used. Smith's insight suggests that the huge increases in productivity obtainable from technology or technological progress are possible because human and physical capital are matched, usually in an organization. See also a short discussion of Adam Smith's theory in the context of business processes.\n\nBabbage wrote a seminal work \"On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures\" analyzing perhaps for the first time the division of labour in factories.\n\nIn the \"Groundwork of the Metaphysics of morals\" 1785, Kant notes the value of the division of labour:All crafts, trades and arts have profited from the division of labour; for when each worker sticks to one particular kind of work that needs to be handled differently from all the others, he can do it better and more easily than when one person does everything. Where work is not thus differentiated and divided, where everyone is a jack-of-all-trades, the crafts remain at an utterly primitive level.\n\nMarx argued that increasing the specialization may also lead to workers with poorer overall skills and a lack of enthusiasm for their work. He described the process as alienation: workers become more and more specialized and work becomes repetitive, eventually leading to complete alienation from the process of production. The worker then becomes \"depressed spiritually and physically to the condition of a machine\".\n\nAdditionally, Marx argued that division of labour creates less-skilled workers. As the work becomes more specialized, less training is needed for each specific job, and the workforce, overall, is less skilled than if one worker did one job entirely.\n\nAmong Marx's theoretical contributions is his sharp distinction between the economic and the social division of labor. That is, some forms of labour co-operation are purely due to \"technical necessity\", but others are a result of a \"social control\" function related to a class and status hierarchy. If these two divisions are conflated, it might appear as though the existing division of labour is technically inevitable and immutable, rather than (in good part) socially constructed and influenced by power relationships. He also argues that in a communist society, the division of labour is transcended, meaning that balanced human development occurs where people fully express their nature in the variety of creative work that they do.\n\nHenry David Thoreau criticized the division of labour in \"Walden\" (published in 1854), on the basis that it removes people from a sense of connectedness with society and with the world at large, including nature. He claimed that the average man in a civilized society is less wealthy, in practice, than one in a \"savage\" society. The answer he gave was that self-sufficiency was enough to cover one's basic needs.\n\nThoreau's friend and mentor, Ralph Waldo Emerson, criticized the division of labour in \"The American Scholar\"; a widely informed, holistic citizenry is vital for the spiritual and physical health of the country.\n\nIn his seminal work, \"The Division of Labor in Society\", Émile Durkheim observes that the division of labour appears in all societies and positively correlates with societal advancement because it increases as a society progresses. Durkheim arrived at the same conclusion regarding the positive effects of the division of labour as his theoretical predecessor, Adam Smith. In \"The Wealth of the Nations\", Smith observes the division of labour results in \"a proportionable [sic] increase of the productive powers of labor.\" While they shared this belief, Durkheim believed the division of labour applied to all \"biological organisms generally\" while Smith believed this law applied \"only to human societies.\" This difference may result from the influence of Charles Darwin’s \"On the Origin of Species\" on Durkheim’s writings. For example, Durkheim observed an apparent relationship between \"the functional specialization of the parts of an organism\" and \"the extent of that organism's evolutionary development,\" which he believed \"extended the scope of the division of labour so as to make its origins contemporaneous with the origins of life itself…implying that its conditions must be found in the essential properties of all organized matter.\"\n\nSince Durkheim’s division of labour applied to all organisms, he considered it a \"natural law\" and worked to determine whether it should be embraced or resisted by first analysing its functions. Durkheim hypothesized that the division of labour fosters social solidarity, yielding \"a wholly moral phenomenon\" that ensures \"mutual relationships\" among individuals.\n\nAs social solidarity cannot be directly quantified, Durkheim indirectly studies solidarity by \"classify[ing] the different types of law to find...the different types of social solidarity which correspond to it.\" Durkheim categorizes: criminal laws and their respective punishments as promoting mechanical solidarity, a sense of unity resulting from individuals engaging in similar work who hold shared backgrounds, traditions, and values; and civil laws as promoting organic solidarity, a society in which individuals engage in different kinds of work that benefit society and other individuals. Durkheim believes that organic solidarity prevails in more advanced societies, while mechanical solidarity typifies less developed societies. He explains that, in societies with more mechanical solidarity, the diversity and division of labour is much less, so individuals have a similar worldview. Similarly, Durkheim opines that in societies with more organic solidarity, the diversity of occupations is greater, and individuals depend on each other more, resulting in greater benefits to society as a whole.\n\nDurkheim’s work enabled social science to progress more efficiently \"in … the understanding of human social behavior.\"\n\nMarx's theories, including the negative claims regarding the division of labour have been criticized by the Austrian economists such as Ludwig von Mises.\n\nThe main argument here is the economic gains accruing from the division of labour far outweigh the costs. It is argued that it is fully possible to achieve balanced human development within capitalism, and alienation is downplayed as mere romantic fiction.\n\nIn \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\", Friedrich A. Hayek states:\n\nThe issue reaches its broadest scope in the controversies about globalization, which is often interpreted as a euphemism for the expansion of world trade based on comparative advantage.\nThis would mean that countries specialise in the work they can do at the lowest cost. Critics however allege that international specialisation cannot be explained sufficiently in terms of \"the work nations do best\", rather this specialisation is guided more by commercial criteria, which favour some countries over others.\n\nThe OECD recently advised (28 June 2005) that:\n\nFew studies have taken place regarding the Global Division of Labour. Information can be drawn from ILO and national statistical offices.\n\nIn one study, Deon Filmer estimated that 2.474 billion people participated in the global non-domestic labour force in the mid-1990s. Of these,\n\nThe majority of workers in industry and services were wage and salary earners – 58 percent of the industrial workforce and 65 percent of the services workforce. But a big portion were self-employed or involved in family labour. Filmer suggests the total of employees worldwide in the 1990s was about 880 million, compared with around a billion working on own account on the land (mainly peasants), and some 480 million working on own account in industry and services. The 2007 ILO Global Employment Trends Report indicated that services have surpassed agriculture for the first time in human history: \"In 2006 the service sector’s share of global employment overtook agriculture for the first time, increasing from 39.5 per cent to 40 per cent. Agriculture decreased from 39.7 per cent to 38.7 per cent. The industry sector accounted for 21.3 per cent of total employment.\"\n\nIn the modern world, those specialists most preoccupied in their work with theorizing about the division of labour are those involved in management and organization. In view of the global extremities of the division of labour, the question is often raised about what division of labour would be most ideal, beautiful, efficient and just.\n\nTwo styles of management that are seen in modern organizations are control and commitment, control being the division of labour style of the past and commitment being the style of the future. Control management is based on the principles of job specialization and the division of labour. This is the assembly line style of job specialization where employees are given a very narrow set of tasks or one specific task. Commitment division of labour is oriented on including the employee and building a level of internal commitment towards accomplishing tasks. Tasks include more responsibility and are coordinated based on expertise rather than formal position.\n\nJob specialization is advantageous in developing employee expertise in a field and boosting organizational production. However, disadvantages of job specialization included limited employee skill, a dependence on entire department fluency, and employee discontent with repetitious tasks.\n\nIt is widely accepted that the division of labour is to a great extent inevitable, simply because no one can do all tasks at once. Labour hierarchy is a very common feature of the modern workplace structure, but of course the way these hierarchies are structured can be influenced by a variety of different factors.\n\nSize, cost, and the development of new technology are factors that have influenced job specialization structures in the modern workplace. The cost of job specialization is what limits small organizations from dividing their labour responsibilities, but as organizations increase in size there is a correlation in the rise of division of labour. Technological developments have led to a decrease in the amount of job specialization in organizations as new technology makes it easier for fewer employees to accomplish a variety of tasks and still enhance production. New technology has also been supportive in the flow of information between departments helping to reduce the feeling of department isolation.\n\nIt is often agreed that the most equitable principle in allocating people within hierarchies is that of true (or proven) competency or ability. This important concept of meritocracy could be read as an explanation or as a justification of why a division of labour is the way it is.\n\nIn general, in capitalist economies, such things are not decided consciously. Different people try different things, and that which is most effective cost-wise (produces the most and best output with the least input) will generally be adopted. Often techniques that work in one place or time do not work as well in another. This does not present a problem, as the only requirement of a capitalist system is that you turn a profit.\n\nAdam Smith famously said in \"The Wealth of Nations\" that the division of labour is limited by the extent of the market. This is because it is by exchange that each person can be specialised in their work and yet still have access to a wide range of goods and services. Hence, reductions in barriers to exchange lead to increases in the division of labour and so help to drive economic growth. Limitations to the division of labour have also been related to coordination and transportation costs.\n\nThere can be motivational advantages to a reduced division of labour (which has been termed ‘job enlargement’ and 'job enrichment'). Jobs that are too specialised in a narrow range of tasks are said to result in demotivation due to boredom and alienation. Hence, a Taylorist approach to work design contributed to worsened industrial relations.\n\nThere are also limitations to the division of labour (and the division of work) that result from work-flow variations and uncertainties. These help to explain issues in modern work organization, such as task consolidations in business process reengineering and the use of multi-skilled work teams. For instance, one stage of a production process may temporarily work at a slower pace, forcing other stages to slow down. One answer to this is to make some portion of resources mobile between stages, so that those resources must be capable of undertaking a wider range of tasks. Another is to consolidate tasks so that they are undertaken one after another by the same workers and other resources. Stocks between stages can also help to reduce the problem to some extent but are costly and can hamper quality control. Note also that modern flexible manufacturing systems require both flexible machines and flexible workers.\n\nIn project-based work, the coordination of resources is a difficult issue for the project manager as project schedules and resulting resource bookings are based on estimates of task durations and so are subject to subsequent revisions. Again, consolidating tasks so that they are undertaken consecutively by the same resources and having resources available that can be called on at short-notice from other tasks can help to reduce such problems, though at the cost of reduced specialisation.\n\nThere are also advantages in a reduced division of labour where knowledge would otherwise have to be transferred between stages. For example, having a single person deal with a customer query means that only that one person has to be familiarised with the customer’s details. It is also likely to result in the query being handled faster due to the elimination of delays in passing the query between different people.\n\nThe clearest exposition of the principles of sexual division of labour across the full range of human societies can be summarized by a large number of logically complementary implicational constraints of the following form: if women of childbearing ages in a given community tend to do X (e.g., preparing soil for planting) they will also do Y (e.g., the planting) while for men the logical reversal in this example would be that if men plant they will prepare the soil. \"Entailment Theory and Method: A Cross-Cultural Analysis of the Sexual Division of Labor\" by White, Brudner and Burton (1977, public domain), using statistical entailment analysis, shows that tasks more frequently chosen by women in these order relations are those more convenient in relation to childrearing. This type of finding has been replicated in a variety of studies, including modern industrial economies. These entailments do not restrict how much work for any given task could be done by men (e.g., in cooking) or by women (e.g., in clearing forests) but are only least-effort or role-consistent tendencies. To the extent that women clear forests for agriculture, for example, they tend to do the entire agricultural sequence of tasks on those clearings. In theory, these types of constraints could be removed by provisions of child care, but ethnographic examples are lacking.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8826", "title": "Davy lamp", "text": "Davy lamp\n\nThe Davy lamp is a safety lamp for use in flammable atmospheres, invented in 1815 by Sir Humphry Davy. It consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. It was created for use in coal mines, to reduce the danger of explosions due to the presence of methane and other flammable gases, called \"firedamp\" or \"minedamp.\"\n\nDavy's invention was preceded by that of William Reid Clanny, an Irish doctor at Bishopwearmouth, who had read a paper to the Royal Society in May 1813. The more cumbersome Clanny safety lamp was successfully tested at Herrington Mill, and he won medals, from the Royal Society of Arts.\n\nDespite his lack of scientific knowledge, engine-wright George Stephenson devised a lamp in which the air entered via tiny holes, through which the flames of the lamp could not pass. A month before Davy presented his design to the Royal Society, Stephenson demonstrated his own lamp to two witnesses by taking it down Killingworth Colliery and holding it in front of a fissure from which firedamp was issuing.\n\nThe first trial of a Davy lamp with a wire sieve was at Hebburn Colliery on 9 January 1816. A letter from Davy (which he intended to be kept private) describing his findings and various suggestions for a safety lamp was made public at a meeting in Newcastle on 3 November 1815, and a paper describing the lamp was formally presented at a Royal Society meeting in London on 9 November. For it, Davy was awarded the Society's Rumford Medal. Davy's lamp differed from Stephenson's in that the flame was surrounded by a screen of gauze, whereas Stephenson's prototype lamp had a perforated plate contained in a glass cylinder (a design mentioned in Davy's Royal Society paper as an alternative to his preferred solution). For his invention Davy was given £2,000 worth of silver (the money being raised by public subscription), whilst Stephenson was accused of stealing the idea from Davy, because the fully developed 'Geordie lamp' had not been demonstrated by Stephenson until after Davy had presented his paper at the Royal Society and (it was held) previous versions had not actually been safe.\n\nA local committee of enquiry gathered in support of Stephenson exonerated him, showing that he had been working separately to create the Geordie lamp, and raised a subscription for him of £1,000. Davy and his supporters refused to accept their findings, and would not see how an uneducated man such as Stephenson could come up with the solution he had: Stephenson himself freely admitted that he had arrived at a practical solution on the basis of an erroneous theory. In 1833 a House of Commons committee found that Stephenson had equal claim to having invented the safety lamp. Davy went to his grave believing that Stephenson had stolen his idea. The Stephenson lamp was used almost exclusively in North East England, whereas the Davy lamp was used everywhere else. The experience gave Stephenson a lifelong distrust of London-based, theoretical, scientific experts.\n\nThe lamp consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen. The screen acts as a flame arrestor; air (and any firedamp present) can pass through the mesh freely enough to support combustion, but the holes are too fine to allow a flame to propagate through them and ignite any firedamp outside the mesh. It originally burned a heavy vegetable oil.\n\nThe lamp also provided a test for the presence of gases. If flammable gas mixtures were present, the flame of the Davy lamp burned higher with a blue tinge. Lamps were equipped with a metal gauge to measure the height of the flame. Miners could place the safety lamp close to the ground to detect gases, such as carbon dioxide, that are denser than air and so could collect in depressions in the mine; if the mine air was oxygen-poor (asphyxiant gas), the lamp flame would be extinguished (\"black damp\" or \"chokedamp\"). A methane-air flame is extinguished at about 17% oxygen content (which will still support life), so the lamp gave an early indication of an unhealthy atmosphere, allowing the miners to get out before they died of asphyxiation.\n\nIn 1816, the Cumberland Pacquet reported a demonstration of the Davy lamp at William Pit, Whitehaven. Placed in a blower \"... the effect was grand beyond description. At first a blue flame was seen to cap the flame of the lamp, - then succeeded a lambent flame, playing in the cylinder; and shortly after, the flame of the firedamp expanded, so as to completely fill the wire gauze. For some time, the flame of the lamp was seen through that of the firedamp, which became ultimately extinguished without explosion. Results more satisfactory were not to be wished...\" Another correspondent to the paper commented \"The Lamp offers absolute security to the miner... With the excellent ventilation of the \"Whitehaven Collieries\" and the application of Sir HUMPHRY's valuable instrument, the accidents from the explosion of' (carburetted) 'hydrogene which have occurred (although comparatively few for such extensive works) will by this happy invention be avoided\"\n\nUnfortunately, this prediction was not fulfilled: in the next thirty years, firedamp explosions in Whitehaven pits cost 137 lives. More generally, the Select Committee on Accidents in Mines reported in 1835 that the introduction of the Davy lamp had led to an increase in mine accidents; the lamp encouraged the working of mines and parts of mines that had previously been closed for safety reasons. For example, in 1835 102 men and boys were killed by a firedamp explosion in a Wallsend colliery working the Bensham seam, described at the subsequent inquest by John Buddle as \"a dangerous seam, which required the utmost care in keeping in a working state\", which could only be worked with the Davy lamp. The coroner noted that a previous firedamp explosion in 1821 had killed 52, but directed his jury that any finding on the wisdom of continuing to work the seam was outside their province.\n\nThe lamps had to be provided by the miners themselves, not the owners, as traditionally the miners had bought their own candles from the company store. Miners still preferred the better illumination from a naked light, and mine regulations insisting that only safety lamps be used were draconian in principle, but in practice neither observed nor enforced. After two accidents in two years (1838-9) in Cumberland pits, both caused by safety checks being carried out by the light of a naked flame, the Royal Commission on Children's Employment commented both on the failure to learn from the first accident, and on the 'further absurdity ' of 'carrying a Davy lamp in one hand for the sake of safety, and a naked lighted candle in the other, as if for the sake of danger. Beyond this there can be no conceiveable thoughtlessness and folly; and when such management is allowed in the mine of two of the most opulent coal-proprietors in the kingdom, we cease to wonder at anything that may take place in mines worked by men equally without capital and science'\n\nAnother reason for the increase in accidents was the unreliability of the lamps themselves. The bare gauze was easily damaged, and once just a single wire broke or rusted away, the lamp became unsafe.\nWork carried out by a scientific witness and reported by the Select Committee showed that the Davy lamp became unsafe in airflows so low that a Davy lamp carried at normal walking pace against normal airflows in walkways was only safe if provided with a draught shield (not normally fitted), and the Committee noted that accidents had happened when the lamp was \"in general and careful use; no one survived to tell the tale of how these occurrences took place; conjecture supplied the want of positive knowledge most unsatisfactorily; but incidents are recorded which prove what must follow unreasonable testing of the lamp; and your Committee are constrained to believe that ignorance and a false reliance upon its merits, in cases attended with unwarrantable risks, have led to disastrous consequences\" The \"South Shields Committee\", a body set up by a public meeting there (in response to an explosion at the St Hilda pit in 1839) to consider the prevention of accidents in mines had shown that mine ventilation in the North-East was generally deficient, with an insufficient supply of fresh air giving every opportunity for explosive mixtures of gas to accumulate. A subsequent Select Committee in 1852 concurred with this view; firedamp explosions could best be prevented by improving mine ventilation (by the use of steam ejectors: the committee specifically advised against fan ventilation), which had been neglected because of over-reliance on the safety of the Davy lamp.\n\nThe Regulation and Inspection of Mines Act of 1860 therefore required coal mines to have an adequate amount of ventilation, constantly produced, to dilute and render harmless noxious gases so that work areas were - under ordinary circumstances - in a fit state to be worked (areas where a normally safe atmosphere could not be ensured were to be fenced off \"as far as possible\"): it also required safety lamps to be examined and securely locked by a duly authorised person before use.\n\nEven when new and clean, illumination from the safety lamps was very poor, and the problem was not fully resolved until electric lamps became widely available in the late 19th century.\n\nA modern-day equivalent of the Davy lamp is the Protector Garforth GR6S flame safety lamp which is used for firedamp testing in all UK coal mines. A modified version of this lamp has been used in the Olympic Flame torch relays. It was used in the relays for the Sydney, Athens, Turin, Beijing, Vancouver and Singapore Youth Olympic Games. It was also used for the Special Olympics Shanghai, Pan American and Central African games and for the London 2012 Summer Olympics relay.\n\nLamps are still made in Eccles, Greater Manchester, in Aberdare, South Wales and in Kolkata, India.\n\nA replica of a Davy lamp is located in front of the ticket office at the Stadium of Light (Sunderland AFC) which is built on a former coal mine.\n\nIn 2015 Bersham Colliery in Wrexham, Wales, which is now a mining museum, invited visitors to bring their Davy Lamps and other industrial heirlooms to the museum for identification. The National Mining Museum Scotland at Newtongrange, Scotland, also celebrated the 200th anniversary of the invention. In 2016, The Royal Institution of Great Britain, where the Davy Lamp prototype is displayed, decided to have the life-saving invention 3D scanned, reverse engineered and presented to the museum visitors in a more accessible digital format via a virtual reality cabinet. At first sight it appears to be a traditional display cabinet but has a touch screen with various options for visitors to view and reference the virtual exhibits inside.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8827", "title": "Docklands Light Railway", "text": "Docklands Light Railway\n\nThe Docklands Light Railway (DLR) is an automated light metro system opened in 1987 to serve the redeveloped Docklands area of London. It reaches north to Stratford, south to Lewisham, west to and in the City of London financial district, and east to Beckton, London City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal.\n\nThe system uses minimal staffing on trains and at major interchange stations; the four below-ground stations are staffed to comply with underground station fire and safety requirements. Similar proposals have been made for the Tube.\n\nThe DLR is operated under a franchise awarded by Transport for London to KeolisAmey Docklands, a joint venture between transport operator Keolis and infrastructure specialists Amey plc. It was previously run for over 17 years by Serco Docklands, part of the Serco Group. The system is owned by Docklands Light Railway Ltd, part of the London Rail division of Transport for London. In Fiscal Year 2016/17, the DLR carried 122.3 million passengers. It has been extended several times and further extensions are under consideration.\n\nThe docks immediately east of Central London began to decline in the early 1960s as cargo became containerised. They had been connected to the national railway network via the London and Blackwall Railway (L&BR), which was closed in 1966 for lack of traffic. The opening of the Tilbury container docks, further east in Essex, finally rendered them redundant, and in 1980 the government gained control of the now-derelict area.\n\nAs early as 1972, consideration was given to how to redevelop the moribund Docklands. Travis Morgan & Partners were commissioned by the London Docklands Study Team to consider the issue. They proposed, among other recommendations, that a \"minitram\" people-mover system capable of carrying up to 20 people in each unit should be constructed to connect the Docklands with the planned Fleet line tube railway terminus at Fenchurch Street railway station. The Greater London Council formed a Docklands Joint Committee with the Boroughs of Greenwich, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets in 1974 to undertake the redevelopment of the area. A light railway system was envisaged, terminating either at Tower Hill tube station or at Fenchurch Street, but both options were seen as too expensive. Nonetheless, in 1976 another report proposed a conventional tube railway for the area and London Transport obtained Parliamentary powers to build a line from Charing Cross railway station to Fenchurch Street, Surrey Docks (now Surrey Quays railway station), the Isle of Dogs, North Greenwich and Custom House to Woolwich Arsenal. This was intended to be the second stage of the Fleet line – which had been renamed the Jubilee line, the first stage of which opened in 1979 from to . However, when the Conservative Party came to power in May 1979 under Margaret Thatcher, the plans to extend the Jubilee line were halted and the new government insisted that a lower-cost option should be pursued.\n\nThe government created the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) in July 1981 to coordinate the redevelopment of the Docklands. The need to provide a cheap public transport solution led to it commissioning London Transport to evaluate a number of exclusively light rail options. The core of the route ran alongside the Great Eastern line out of London and south along the former London & Blackwall Railway line through the Isle of Dogs. Three terminus options were proposed at the west end, at Tower Hill, Minories and Aldgate East. The Tower Hill option would have required a low-level interchange to be constructed alongside the existing Underground station, but this would have been a very costly venture. The Minories option, a high-level station virtually on the site of the old Minories railway station, was selected and became the current Tower Gateway DLR terminus. Aldgate East would have been perhaps the most ambitious of all of the options, as it originally envisaged a low-level connection with the District line that would have allowed DLR trains to run on Underground tracks to a variety of central London destinations. However, it quickly became apparent that there was no capacity on the existing network for integrating the DLR into the Underground.\n\nTwo southern terminus options were put forward, at Cubitt Town (today's Island Gardens station) and Tiller Road, on the west side of Millwall Dock, with two possible routes to reach them. A \"western\" route would have run from the Westferry station alongside West Ferry Road via Cuba Street, then either terminating at Tiller Road or continuing over Millwall Docks Cut to a terminus at Cubitt Town. The \"central\" option required the West India Docks to be infilled or bridged and would run down the middle of the peninsula, through what was at the time an area of derelict warehouses. Ultimately this latter option was chosen, though the 1981 London Transport report warned that without extensive development around Canary Wharf the area would be \"very isolated with poor traffic prospects\" – as indeed it was, for a number of years.\n\nThe contract for the initial system was awarded to GEC Mowlem in 1984 and the system was constructed from 1985 to 1987 at a cost of £77 million. The line was formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 July 1987, and passenger services began on 31 August.\n\nThe initial system comprised two routes, from and Stratford to . It was mainly elevated on disused railway viaducts or new concrete viaducts, and adopted disused surface railway formations between Poplar and Stratford. The trains were fully automated, controlled by computer, and had no driver; a Passenger Service Agent (PSA) on each train, originally referred to as a \"Train Captain\", was responsible for patrolling the train, checking tickets, making announcements and controlling the doors. PSAs could take control of the train in circumstances including equipment failure and emergencies. A total of eleven EMUs supplied by Linke-Hofmann-Busche comprised the first generation of the Docklands Light Railway rolling stock.\n\nThe system was lightweight, with stations designed for trains of only a single articulated vehicle. The three branches totalled , had 15 stations, and were connected by a flat triangular junction near . Services ran from Tower Gateway to Island Gardens and from Stratford to Island Gardens; the north side of the junction was used only for access to the depot at Poplar. The stations were mostly of a common design and constructed from standard components. A common feature was a short half-cylindrical glazed blue canopy. All stations were above ground and were generally unstaffed, although later extension included stations below ground which were required by law to be staffed in case of evacuation.\n\nThe initial system had a relatively low capacity, but the Docklands area very quickly developed into a major financial centre and employment zone, increasing traffic. In particular Tower Gateway, at the edge of the City of London, attracted criticism for its poor connections, as it did not connect directly with the nearby Tower Hill tube station or Fenchurch Street railway station. The criticism arose partly because the system usage was higher than expected. Plans were developed, before the system opened, to extend it to in the west and Beckton in the east. Stations and trains were extended to two-unit length, and the system was expanded into the heart of the City of London to through a tunnel, which opened in 1991. This extension left on a stub. The original trains were not suitable for use underground due to a lack of fire-proofing. They were operated for a time on the above-ground sections only, and were later sold.\n\nAs the Canary Wharf office complex grew, Canary Wharf DLR station was redeveloped from a small wayside station to a large one with six platforms serving three tracks and a large overall roof, fully integrated into the malls below the office towers.\n\nThe east of Docklands needed better transport connections to encourage development, and a fourth branch, towards Beckton, was planned, with several route options available. A route from via and the north side of the Royal Docks complex was chosen, and opened in 1994. Initially it was thought the line was likely to be underutilised, due to the sparse development in the area. As part of this extension, one side of the original flat triangular junction was replaced by a grade-separated junction west of Poplar. Poplar was rebuilt to give cross-platform interchange between the Stratford and Beckton lines, with a new grade-separated junction built east of the station at the divergence of the Stratford and Beckton lines.\n\nEarly on, Lewisham London Borough Council commissioned a feasibility study into extending the system under the River Thames. This led the council to advocate an extension via Greenwich and Deptford, terminating at Lewisham railway station. The ambitions of the operators were supported by politicians in Parliament, including the future Labour Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott, and Lord Whitty; and by 1996 construction work had begun.\n\nThe Lewisham extension opened on 3 December 1999. It left the Island Gardens route south of the Crossharbour turn-back sidings, and dropped gently to , where a street-level station replaced the high-level one on the former London & Blackwall Railway viaduct. The line then entered a tunnel, following the route of the viaduct to a shallow subsurface station at , accessible by stairs or a lift. It crossed under the Thames to in the centre of Greenwich, and surfaced at Greenwich railway station, with cross-platform interchange between the northbound track and the London-bound main line. The line snaked on a concrete viaduct to , before descending to at street level, close to Lewisham town centre, terminating in two platforms between and below the main-line platforms at Lewisham railway station, with buses stopping outside the station. The extension quickly proved profitable.\n\nThe next developments were aided by a five-year programme of investment for public transport across London that was unveiled by Mayor of London Ken Livingstone on 12 October 2004. On 2 December 2005, an eastward branch along the approximate route of the former Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway on the southern side of the Royal Docks complex opened from Canning Town to via .\n\nA further extension from to Woolwich Arsenal opened on 10 January 2009, providing interchange with the North Kent main line, close to the planned future stop on the Crossrail line to Abbey Wood via West India and Royal Docks, met by Private Finance Initiative funding. Construction began in June 2005, the same month that the contracts were finalised, and the tunnels were completed on 23 July 2007, and formally opened by Boris Johnson, Mayor of London on 12 January 2009. Following completion, the project was shortlisted for the 2009 Prime Minister's Better Public Building Award.\n\nThe original was closed in mid-2008 for complete reconstruction. The two terminal tracks either side of a narrow island platform were replaced by a single track between two platforms, one for arriving passengers and the other for departing (Spanish solution). It reopened on 2 March 2009.\n\nAs part of an upgrade to allow three-car trains, strengthening work was necessary at the Delta Junction north of . It was decided to include this in a plan for further grade separation to eliminate the conflict between services to Stratford and from Bank. A new timetable was introduced, with improved frequencies at peak hours. The new grade-separated route from Bank to Canary Wharf is used throughout the day, bypassing West India Quay station until mid-evening. Work on this project proceeded concurrently with the three-car upgrade work and the 'flyunder', and the improved timetable came into use on 24 August 2009.\n\nIn addition to the three-car station extensions, part of which was funded from the 2012 Olympics budget, a line was opened from Canning Town to Stratford and Stratford International railway station along the former North London Line of the national railway system, with additional stations. It parallels the London Underground Jubilee line for much of its length. A substantial multi-level flying junction was built south of Canning Town to enable trains from Bank/Poplar and Stratford International to operate to either of the eastern termini at Beckton and Woolwich Arsenal. There are through trains between all these points, with different patterns at different times of the day. The extension suffered some delay in opening, being completed in August 2011. It provides a direct link between two of the major Olympics locations: the Stadium and Park at Stratford and the ExCeL adjacent to Custom House on the Beckton line.\n\nThe DLR is long, with 45 stations. There are six branches: to Lewisham in the south, and Stratford International in the north, and Woolwich Arsenal in the east, and Central London in the west, splitting to and . Although the layout allows many different routes, the five following are operated in normal service:\n\nThere is capability for an additional shuttle from Canning Town to Prince Regent when exhibitions are in progress at the ExCeL exhibition centre.\n\nAt terminal stations trains reverse direction in the platforms except at Bank where there is a reversing headshunt in the tunnel beyond the station. Many peak-hour trains on the Lewisham route from Stratford turn back at Canary Wharf. During service disruption or planned engineering work, trains can also turn back at and . Trains serve every station on the route, but trains from Bank to Lewisham do not call at West India Quay because they are routed along the diveunder track to avoid junction conflicts. During long-term works for extension projects, other routes may be operated at weekends, such as Beckton to Lewisham if the Bank branch is closed.\nThe northern, southern and south-eastern branches terminate at the National Rail stations at Stratford, Stratford International, Lewisham and Woolwich Arsenal. Other interchanges with National Rail are at Limehouse, Greenwich and West Ham, while out of station interchanges for Oyster card holders exist between Shadwell DLR station and London Overground's station of the same name, and between Fenchurch Street and the DLR's western termini Tower Gateway and Bank.\n\nBetween Limehouse and Tower Gateway, the DLR runs parallel to the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway.\n\nMost stations are elevated, with others at street level, in cutting or underground. Access to the platforms is mostly by staircase and lift, with escalators at some stations. From the outset the system has been fully accessible to wheelchairs; much attention was paid to quick and effective accessibility for all passengers. The stations have high platforms matching the floor height of the cars, allowing level access for passengers with wheelchairs or pushchairs.\n\nMost stations are of a modular design dating back to the initial system, extended and improved with two side platforms, each with separate access from the street, and platform canopies, although few examples remain of the original, distinctive rounded roof design. Stations are unstaffed, except the underground stations at , , , Stratford International and Woolwich Arsenal for safety reasons, a few of the busier interchange stations, and City Airport, which has a ticket office for passengers unfamiliar with the system. Canning Town, Custom House and Prince Regent are normally staffed on the platform whenever there is a significant exhibition at the ExCeL exhibition centre.\n\nOn 3 July 2007, DLR officially launched an art programme called DLR Art, similar to that on the London Underground, Art on the Underground. Alan Williams was appointed to produce the first temporary commission, called \"Sidetrack\", which portrays the ordinary and extraordinary sights, often unfamiliar to passengers, on the system and was displayed throughout the network.\n\nThe system is part of the London fare zone system, and Travelcards that cover the appropriate zones are valid. There are one-day and season DLR-only \"Rover\" tickets, plus a one-day DLR \"Rail and River Rover\" ticket for the DLR and City Cruises river boats. Oyster pay-as-you-go is also available; or NFC enabled bank card holders (contactless) passengers need to touch both in and out on the platform readers or pass through the automatic gates. Tickets can be purchased from ticket machines at the entrance to the platforms, and are required before entering the platform. There are no ticket barriers at DLR-only stations, and correct ticketing is enforced by random on-train inspections by the PSA. Passengers without a correct ticket, pay-as-you-go Oyster users or a contactless bank card who have failed to touch in at the start of the journey may be liable to a £80 penalty fare or prosecution for fare evasion. There are barriers at Bank, , Woolwich Arsenal, West Ham and , where the DLR platforms are within a London Underground or National Rail barrier line.\n\nWithin a year of launch, annual passenger numbers were 17 million. This increased to 64 million in 2009, to more than 80 million in 2011, and most recently to 110.2 million annual passengers in Fiscal Year 2014. While the first five years were plagued by unreliability and operational problems, the system has now become highly reliable. In 2008, 87% of the population of North Woolwich were in favour of the DLR.\n\nThe Parliamentary Transport Select Committee has reviewed light rail. Due to the success of the DLR, proposals for similar systems elsewhere have emerged. The North and West London Light Railway is a plan for an orbital railway serving the other side of London.\n\nThe DLR has been successful, as have other recent light rail systems. However, the DLR has been criticised for having been designed with insufficient capacity to meet the demand that quickly arose. The level of demand was underestimated. In 1989 such criticism was aimed at GEC, a major contractor for construction.\n\nUntil 1 July 2013, the only bicycles that were allowed were folding ones. DLR stated that this is because if evacuation is required, they would slow down the process. DLR cars, especially older rolling stock, were not designed with bicycles in mind – if they were allowed, they might obstruct doors and emergency exits. One incident in 2007 involved a station manager refusing to allow a train to leave before several triathlon competitors left. On 1 July 2013, DLR embarked on a trial of allowing all cyclists to use the trains outside of weekday commuter peak hours, except at Bank station. As of January 2014, the trial was made permanent, and full-size bicycles are now carried on DLR at off-peak hours and weekends (except Bank Station, where bicycles are not permitted for safety reasons).\n\nThe DLR is operated by 145 high-floor bi-directional single-articulated Electric Multiple Units (EMUs). Each car has four doors on each side, and two or three cars make up a train. There are no cabs because normal operations are automated, and a small driver's console is concealed behind a locked panel at each end, from which the PSA can drive the car. Consoles at each door opening allow the PSA to control door closure and make announcements whilst patrolling the train. With the absence of a driver's position, the fully glazed car ends provide a forward and rear view for passengers. The top speed is .\n\nDespite having high floors and being automated, the cars are derived from a German light-rail design intended for street running. All cars look similar but there have been several different types, some still in service, others sold to other operators. B2007 units were purchased from Bombardier in 2005 and delivered between 2007 and 2010.\n\nThere are operating and maintenance depots at Poplar, now secondary to the larger site at Beckton, built on the site of the Beckton Gas Works in 1996 and accessed via a spur at Gallions Reach. Rolling stock is kept at both locations, which have maintenance workshops and extensive open-air carriage sidings. The Poplar depot, which is also the operating headquarters of Docklands Light Railway Ltd, KeolisAmey Docklands Ltd and the Emirates Air-Line cable car, houses diesel locomotives used for track maintenance. Poplar depot is alongside the north side of the Stratford line east of the station, and Beckton depot is to the east of the line on a long spur north-east of Gallions Reach. Beckton Depot has the only level crossing on DLR. It is an AHB type and the barriers are down unless a user wants to cross, much like Appleford but AHB styled.\n\nOne of the diesel locos stabled at Poplar is 1979 GEC Traction 0-4-0, one of three built for Shotton Steelworks. Since they were used at the steelworks, one has been scrapped, one has recently been acquired by the Yorkshire Wolds Railway and the third is now at Poplar named \"Kevin Keaney\". Its original nickname was \"Sooty\" because of the amount of exhaust this old engine produced.\n\nOriginally the DLR used signalling based on a fixed-block technology developed by GEC-General Signal and General Railway Signal. This was replaced in 1994 with a moving-block TBTC (Transmission Based Train Control) system developed by Alcatel, called SelTrac. The SelTrac system was bought by Thales in 2007 and updates are provided by Thales Rail Signalling Solutions. The same technology is used by rapid transit systems including Vancouver's SkyTrain, Toronto's SRT, San Francisco's Municipal Railway (MUNI) and Hong Kong's MTR. The SelTrac S40 system has also been adopted by the London Underground Jubilee line and Northern line. Transmissions occur via an inductive loop cable between each train's Vehicle On-Board Controller (VOBC) and the control centre (VCC, SMC) at Beckton. If this link is broken and communication is lost between the VOBC and VCC, SMC, the train stops until it is authorised to move again. If the whole system fails the train can run in restricted manual at for safety until the system is restored and communication is re-established. Emergency brakes can be applied if the train breaks the speed limit during manual control or overshoots a fixed stopping point, or if it leaves the station when the route has not been set.\n\nWith the development of the eastern Docklands as part of the Thames Gateway initiative and London’s staging of the 2012 Summer Olympics, several extensions and enhancements have recently been undertaken.\n\nCapacity has been increased by upgrading for three-car trains. The alternative of more frequent trains was rejected as the signalling changes needed would have cost no less than upgrading to longer trains and with fewer benefits. The railway was built for single-car operation, and the upgrade required both strengthening viaducts to take heavier trains and lengthening many pre-extension platforms which were not originally built to take three-car trains. The extra capacity was useful for the 2012 Summer Olympics, which increased the use of London's transport network. The main contractor for the expansion and alteration works was Taylor Woodrow.\n\nElverson Road, Royal Albert, Gallions Reach and Cutty Sark have not been extended for three-car trains; such extension may be impossible in some cases. Selective door operation is used, with emergency walkways in case a door fails to remain shut. is underground, and both costs and the risk to nearby historic buildings prevent platform extension. The tunnel has an emergency walkway. Additional work beyond that needed to take the three-car trains was also carried out at some stations. This included replacing canopies with more substantial ones along the full platform length. A new has been built east of the former location as nearby curves precluded lengthening. now has a third platform. was closed until March 2009 and re-opened as a single-track three-car terminus with two platforms, one for boarding and the other for alighting. \n\nFor this upgrade DLR purchased an additional 31 cars compatible with existing rolling stock. The works were originally planned as three phases: Bank-Lewisham, Poplar-Stratford, and the Beckton branch. The original £200m contract was awarded on 3 May 2007. Work started in 2007 and Bank-Lewisham was originally due to be completed in 2009. However, the work programme for the first two phases was merged and the infrastructure work was completed by the end of January 2010. The Lewisham-Bank route now runs three-car trains exclusively. They started running on the Beckton branch on 9 May 2011. Stratford to Lewisham and Bank to Woolwich Arsenal services sometimes operate as three-car trains; other routes will run the longer trains when demand requires it.\n\nThe extension to Stratford International, taking over the North London Line from Canning Town to Stratford, links the Docklands area with domestic high-speed services on High Speed 1. It was an important part of transport improvements for the 2012 Olympic Games, much of which were held on a site adjoining Stratford International. The first contract for construction work was awarded on 10 January 2007 and construction started in mid-2007. Originally scheduled to open in mid-2010, the line opened on 31 August 2011. On 11 November 2015 the Mayor of London announced that all stations on this line will be rezoned from zone 3 to zone 2/3.\n\nStation names in bold are former North London Line stations.\n\nNew stations are:\n\nFrom Canning Town to Stratford the extension runs parallel to the Jubilee line of the London Underground. As well as providing interchange with the adjacent Jubilee line stations, there are additional DLR stations at Star Lane, Abbey Road and Stratford High Street.\n\nAt Stratford new platforms have been built for the North London Line at the northern end of the station. The old platforms (formerly 1 and 2) adjacent to the Jubilee line have been rebuilt for the DLR, renumbered 16 (towards Stratford International) and 17 (towards Beckton/Woolwich Arsenal). Interchange between the Stratford International branch and DLR trains via Poplar is possible although the platforms are widely separated and at different levels. There is no physical connection between the two branches. As part of the Transport & Works Act (TWA) application, Royal Victoria on the Beckton branch has been be extended to accommodate three-car trains, with a siding to enable trains to reverse there, using land released by the closure of the parallel North London Line. A partly grade-separated junction has been built south of Canning Town to prevent conflicting movements between the Bank branch and the Stratford International branch to and from the Beckton and Woolwich Arsenal branches.\n\nOne of the tunnel portals for Crossrail is on the original site of Pudding Mill Lane station. As a consequence, work was carried out to divert the DLR between City Mill River and the River Lea on to a new viaduct further south. This included a replacement station, which opened on 28 April 2014. The former station stood on the only significant section of single track on the system, between Bow Church and Stratford, though the opportunity will be taken to double the track in three stages, to improve capacity. There was originally no provision for works beyond the realigned section in the Crossrail Act.\n\nThis proposed extension from to via the riverside at Barking would connect the Barking Reach area, a formerly industrial area now due to be a major redevelopment as part of the London Riverside, with Docklands. It would cover major developments at Creekmouth, Barking Riverside, Dagenham Dock Opportunity Area, and five stations are planned, at Beckton Riverside, Creekmouth, Barking Riverside, Goresbrook (formerly Dagenham Vale) and Dagenham Dock. The extension is key if English Partnerships' plan is to work. As shown in DLR's first consultation leaflet, there are proposals to extend further, possibly to or Rainham, or even to the other side of the Thames, including one or two new stations at Thamesmead, and then on to Abbey Wood, for North Kent Line services to Dartford and The Medway Towns, as well as Crossrail connections.\n\nConstruction was not expected to start until 2013, and the earliest expected completion date was 2017. However, the financial downturn meant that TfL requested a delay to the public enquiry while funding was clarified. Given that the purpose of the extension was to serve as-yet unbuilt homes, it became very difficult to predict timescales for this project. The project has been reported to have been cancelled by the Mayor of London Boris Johnson as a cost-cutting measure, although there have been calls for this to be reconsidered, the extension being regarded by Barking and Dagenham council as essential to regenerating the area.\n\nIn October 2009, the plan had seemed to be once again under consideration. The Mayor's Transport Strategy stated that the Mayor, through Transport for London, would investigate the feasibility of the extension to Dagenham Dock as part of the housing proposals for Barking Riverside.\n\n\"Thames Wharf\" has been the planned name for two separate DLR stations. In 1994 the proposed location was between and . Subsequently, the name was transferred to a potential future development on the London City Airport extension between and , due west of the western end of Royal Victoria Dock. Since the station's intended purpose is to serve the surrounding area (currently a mix of brownfield and run-down industrial sites) when it is regenerated, the development is indefinitely on hold due to the area being safeguarded for the Silvertown Tunnel, a new Thames river crossing that has been proposed but currently has no timetable for implementation.\n\nA site near to London City Airport has been identified as a possible additional station on the London City Airport branch. The Connaught Tunnel is here, and will be used again when some of the former Custom House to North Woolwich section of the Eastern Counties and Thames Junction Railway is taken over by Crossrail. However, no plans have emerged as to if or when a station might be built here, even though the original extension was designed to allow this. It may be located south of the Connaught Crossing.\n\nIn February 2006 a proposal to extend the DLR to from DLR branch was revealed. The idea, originating from a DLR \"Horizon Study\", is at a very early stage at the moment, but would involve extending the line from Bank in bored tunnels under Central London to the Charing Cross Jubilee line platforms, which would be brought back to public use. These platforms are now on a spur off the current Jubilee line and are not used by passenger trains. It has since been revealed that a proposed route as far as will be investigated.\n\nWhile not confirmed, it is probable that the Charing Cross scheme would use the overrun tunnels between Charing Cross Jubilee platforms and slightly west of . These tunnels were intended to be incorporated into the abandoned Phase 2 of the \"Fleet Line\" (Phase 1 became the original Jubilee line, prior to the Jubilee line Extension). However they would need enlargement because DLR gauge is larger than tube gauge and current safety regulations would require an emergency walkway in the tunnel.\n\nTwo reasons driving the proposal are capacity problems at Bank, having just one interchange between the DLR and the central portion of Underground, and the difficult journeys faced by passengers from Kent and South Coast between their rail termini and the DLR. Intermediate stations would be at City Thameslink/Ludgate Circus and Aldwych, which was intended for future connection with the proposed but now abandoned Cross River Tram.\n\nIn 2011, strategy documents proposed a DLR extension to and . Transport for London have considered driving a line from via north to the rail termini. The main benefit of such an extension would be to broaden the available direct transport links to the Canary Wharf site. It would create a new artery in central London and help relieve the Northern and Circle lines and provide another metro line to serve the High Speed line into Euston.\n\nThis possible extension was considered during the latest Horizon Study. The route would follow the Southeastern line and terminate between and stations. It has been seen as attractive to the district, as has the current terminus at Lewisham, built in an earlier extension. A map published in 2010 by Transport for London suggests that a further extension from Catford to has also been considered.\n\nHowever, early plans showed problems due to being only marginally lower than the busy A20 road, which impedes any extension. The plan is however being revised. When the Lewisham extension was first completed there were proposals to continue further to Beckenham to link it up with the Tramlink system. However, the way in which Lewisham station was built impedes this possible extension and it would prove costly to redevelop.\n\nAnother proposal is to by taking over the Bromley North Line, a short National Rail branch line which has no direct services to London. The scheme being considered by Transport for London and the London Borough of Bromley would convert the branch line to DLR operation. Although Lewisham Council planned to re-route the A20 road and redevelop the area south of Lewisham DLR station, the plans published in 2012 have no safeguarded route for an extension, making one unlikely.\n\nThe proposed Gallions Reach Crossing has been suggested by TfL as allowing a branch to leave the existing DLR network at Gallions Reach, and cross the river on the proposed tunnel/bridge and into Thamesmead. The new branch could then pass through Thamesmead and towards Abbey Wood, Woolwich, or northwards towards Barking. On 4 October 2016 the London Assembly approved the extension to Thamesmead.\n\nOn 10 March 1987, before the system opened, a test train crashed through buffer stops at the original high-level terminus and was left hanging from the end of the elevated track. The accident was caused by unauthorised tests being run before accident-preventing modifications had been installed. The train was being driven manually at the time.\n\nOn 22 April 1991, two trains collided at a junction on the bridge during morning rush hour, requiring a shutdown of the system and evacuation of passengers by ladder. One train was travelling automatically, while the other was under manual control.\n\nOn 9 February 1996, the Provisional Irish Republican Army blew up a lorry under a bridge near , killing two people and injuring many others. The blast caused £85 million of damage and marked an end to the IRA ceasefire. Significant disruption was caused and a train was stranded at Island Gardens, unable to move until the track was rebuilt.\n\nDLR was a wholly owned subsidiary of London Regional Transport until 1992 when it was transferred to the London Docklands Development Corporation.\n\nThe infrastructure is owned by Docklands Light Railway Ltd, part of the London Rail division of Transport for London, which also manages London Overground, London Tramlink, Emirates Air-Line Cable Car and Crossrail. The first franchise was awarded to Serco Docklands Limited for seven years; operations began in April 1997. A management buyout backed by Serco management later sold its shares to Serco. A two-year extension was granted in 2002.\n\nIn February 2005 Transport for London announced that Balfour Beatty/Keolis, First Carillion, RATP/Transdev and Serco had been shortlisted to operate the franchise.\n\nIn November 2005 Transport for London announced that Serco had retained the franchise for seven years from May 2006.\n\nThe Lewisham, City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions were designed, financed, built and maintained by private companies (concessionnaires): City Greenwich Lewisham (CGL) Rail, City Airport Rail Enterprises (CARE), and Woolwich Arsenal Rail Enterprises (WARE). In 2011, Transport Trading Limited (a subsidiary of Transport for London) bought out the companies responsible for the City Airport and Woolwich Arsenal extensions, leaving only the Lewisham extension under private ownership.\n\nIn July 2012 Transport for London called for expressions of interest in bidding for the next DLR franchise. In January 2013 Serco's contract was extended until September 2014.\n\nIn April 2013 Transport for London announced that Go-Ahead/Colas Rail, Keolis/Amey, Serco and Stagecoach had been shortlisted to bid for the next franchise. However, on 30 August, just over a week before the bid submission date of 9 September 2013, Go-Ahead/Colas Rail pulled out of the running. The franchise was awarded to Keolis/Amey with a handover date of 7 December 2014.\n\nThe DLR appears in the video to Sean Paul and Clean Bandit's single \"Rockabye\".\n\nWoolwich Arsenal plays an underground station in Athens in Jason Bourne.\n\n"}
{"id": "8828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8828", "title": "Dundee", "text": "Dundee\n\nDundee (; ), officially the City of Dundee, is Scotland's fourth-largest city and the 51st-most-populous built-up area in the United Kingdom. The mid-year population estimate for 2016 was 148,270 which gave Dundee a population density of 2,478/km or 6,420/sq mi, the second-highest in Scotland. It lies within the eastern central Lowlands on the north bank of the Firth of Tay, which feeds into the North Sea. Under the name of \"Dundee City\", it forms one of the 32 council areas used for local government in Scotland.\n\nHistorically part of Angus, the city developed into a burgh in the late 12th century and established itself as an important east coast trading port. Rapid expansion was brought on by the Industrial Revolution, particularly in the 19th century when Dundee was the centre of the global jute industry. This, along with its other major industries gave Dundee its epithet as the city of \"jute, jam and journalism\".\n\nToday, Dundee is promoted as \"One City, Many Discoveries\" in honour of Dundee's history of scientific activities and of the RRS \"Discovery\", Robert Falcon Scott's Antarctic exploration vessel, which was built in Dundee and is now berthed at Discovery Point. Biomedical and technological industries have arrived since the 1980s, and the city now accounts for 10% of the United Kingdom's digital-entertainment industry. Dundee has two universities — the University of Dundee and the Abertay University. In 2014 Dundee was recognised by the United Nations as the UK's first UNESCO City of Design for its diverse contributions to fields including medical research, comics and video games.\n\nA unique feature of Dundee is that its two professional football clubs Dundee United and Dundee F.C. have stadiums all but adjacent to each other.\n\nWith the decline of traditional industry, the city has adopted a plan to regenerate and reinvent itself as a cultural centre. In pursuit of this, a £1 billion master plan to regenerate and to reconnect the Waterfront to the city centre started in 2001 and is expected to be completed within a 30-year period, with the Dundee Victoria & Albert Museum opening by 2018 at a cost of £80 million.\n\nThe name \"Dundee\" is made up of two parts: the common Celtic place-name element \"dun\", meaning fort; and a second part that may derive from a Celtic element, cognate with the Gaelic \"dè\", meaning 'fire'.\n\nWhile earlier evidence for human occupation is abundant, Dundee's success and growth as a seaport town arguably came as a result of William the Lion's charter, granting Dundee to his younger brother, David (later Earl of Huntingdon) in the late 12th century. The situation of the town and its promotion by Earl David as a trading centre led to a period of prosperity and growth. The earldom was passed down to David's descendants, amongst whom was John Balliol. The town became a Royal Burgh on John's coronation as king in 1292. The town and its castle were occupied by English forces for several years during the First War of Independence and recaptured by Robert the Bruce in early 1312. The original Burghal charters were lost during the occupation and subsequently renewed by Bruce in 1327.\n\nThe burgh suffered considerably during the conflict known as the Rough Wooing of 1543 to 1550, and was occupied by the English forces of Andrew Dudley from 1547. In 1548, unable to defend the town against an advancing Scottish force, Dudley ordered that the town be burnt to the ground. In 1645, during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Dundee was again besieged, this time by the Royalist Marquess of Montrose. The town was finally destroyed by Parliamentarian forces led by George Monck in 1651. The town played a pivotal role in the establishment of the Jacobite cause when John Graham of Claverhouse, 1st Viscount Dundee raised the Stuart standard on the Dundee Law in 1689. The town was held by the Jacobites in the 1715–16 rising, and on 6 January 1716 the Jacobite claimant to the throne, James VIII and III (the Old Pretender), made a public entry into the town. Many in Scotland, including many in Dundee, regarded him as the rightful king.\n\nA notable resident of Dundee was Adam Duncan, 1st Viscount Duncan of Camperdown, Baron of Lundie (1 July 1731 to 4 August 1804). He was born in Dundee on 1 July 1731, the son of Alexander Duncan of Lundie, Provost of Dundee. Adam was educated in Dundee and later joined the Royal Navy on board the sloop Trial. He rose to be admiral and in October 1797 defeated the Dutch fleet off Camperdown (north of Haarlem). This was seen as one of the most significant actions in naval history.\n\nThe economy of mediaeval Dundee centred on the export of raw wool, with the production of finished textiles being a reaction to recession in the 15th century. Two government Acts in the mid 18th century had a profound effect on Dundee's industrial success: the textile industry was revolutionised by the introduction of large four-storey mills, stimulated in part by the 1742 Bounty Act which provided a government-funded subsidy on Osnaburg linen produced for export. Expansion of the whaling industry was triggered by the second Bounty Act, introduced in 1750 to increase Britain's maritime and naval skill base. Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city's population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821.\n\nThe phasing out of the linen export bounty between 1825 and 1832 stimulated demand for cheaper textiles, particularly for cheaper, tough fabrics. The discovery that the dry fibres of jute could be lubricated with whale oil (of which Dundee had a surfeit, following the opening of its gasworks) to allow it to be processed in mechanised mills resulted in the Dundee mills rapidly converting from linen to jute, which sold at a quarter of the price of flax. Interruption of Prussian flax imports during the Crimean War and of cotton during the American Civil War resulted in a period of inflated prosperity for Dundee and the jute industry dominated Dundee throughout the latter half of the 19th century. Unprecedented immigration, notably of Irish workers, led to accelerated urban expansion, and at the height of the industry's success, Dundee supported 62 jute mills, employing some 50,000 workers. Cox Brothers, who owned the massive Camperdown Works in Lochee, were one of the largest jute manufacturers in Europe and employed more than 5,000 workers.\n\nThe rise of the textile industries brought with it an expansion of supporting industries, notably of the whaling, maritime and shipbuilding industries, and extensive development of the waterfront area started in 1815 to cope with increased demand for port capacity. At its height, 200 ships per year were built there, including Robert Falcon Scott's Antarctic research vessel, the . This ship is now on display at Discovery Point in the city. A significant whaling industry was also based in Dundee, largely existing to supply the jute mills with whale oil. Whaling ceased in 1912 and shipbuilding ceased in 1981.\n\nWhile the city's economy was dominated by the jute industry, it also became known for smaller industries. Most notable among these were James Keiller's and Sons, established in 1795, which pioneered commercial marmalade production, and the publishing firm DC Thomson, which was founded in the city in 1905. Dundee was said to be built on the 'three Js': Jute, Jam and Journalism.\n\nThe town was also the location of one of the worst rail disasters in British history, the Tay Bridge disaster. The first Tay Rail Bridge was opened in 1878. It collapsed some 18 months later during a storm, as a passenger train passed over it, resulting in the loss of 75 lives. The most destructive fire in the city's history came in 1906, reportedly sending \"rivers of burning whisky\" through the street.\n\nThe jute industry fell into decline in the early 20th century, partly due to reduced demand for jute products and partly due to an inability to compete with the emerging industry in Calcutta. This gave rise to unemployment levels far in excess of the national average, peaking in the inter-war period, but major recovery was seen in the post-war period, thanks to the arrival first of American light engineering companies like Timex and NCR, and subsequent expansion into microelectronics.\n\nA £1 billion master plan to regenerate Dundee Waterfront is expected to last for a 30-year period between 2001 and 2031. The aims of the project are to reconnect the city centre to the waterfront; to improve facilities for walking, cyclists and buses; to replace the existing inner ring road with a pair of east/west tree-lined boulevards; and to provide a new civic square and a regenerated railway station and arrival space at the western edge. A new Victoria and Albert Museum is also being built, set for completion by 2018.\n\nDundee was granted Royal Burgh status on the coronation of John Balliol as King of Scotland in 1292. The city has two mottos— (\"Gift of God\") and \"Prudentia et Candore\" (With Thought and Purity) although usually only the latter is used for civic purposes.\n\nPrior to 1996, Dundee was governed by the City of Dundee District Council. This was formed in 1975, implementing boundaries imposed in the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. Under these boundaries, the Angus burgh and district of Monifieth, and the Perth electoral division of Longforgan (which included Invergowrie) were annexed to the county of the city of Dundee. In 1996, the Dundee City unitary authority was created following implementation of the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994. This placed Monifieth and Invergowrie in the unitary authorities of Angus and Perth and Kinross, largely reinstating the pre-1975 county boundaries. Some controversy has ensued as a result of these boundary changes, with Dundee city councillors arguing for the return of Monifieth and Invergowrie.\n\nDundee is one of 32 council areas of Scotland, and is represented by the Dundee City Council – a local council composed of 29 elected councillors. Previously the city was a county of a city and later a district of the Tayside region. Council meetings take place in the City Chambers, which opened in 1933 in City Square. The civic head and chair of the council is known as the Lord Provost, a position similar to that of mayor in other cities. The political head of the council is known as the Leader of the Council or Leader of the Administration. The Leader chairs the Policy & Resources Committee. Dundee House, the new headquarters for the city council on North Lindsay Street, opened in August 2011. This has replaced Tayside House which was demolished in 2013 as part of the Dundee Waterfront improvements.\n\nElections to the council are normally on a four-year cycle. The most recent election took place on 4 May 2017. Since 2007, the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004 has meant that there are eight multi-member wards which elect three or four councillors by single transferable vote, to produce a form of proportional representation. The 2012 elections gave the SNP overall control of the council with 16 seats. However the 2017 contest saw the SNP lose their majority, although they remained the largest party with 14 councillors. Scotland's longest-serving councillor, Ian Borthwick, sits on the council.\n\nFor elections to the British House of Commons at Westminster, the city area and portions of the Angus council area are divided in two constituencies. The constituencies of Dundee East and Dundee West are as of 2015 represented by Stewart Hosie (Scottish National Party) and Chris Law (Scottish National Party), respectively. For elections to the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood, the city area is divided between three constituencies. The Dundee East (Holyrood) constituency and the Dundee West (Holyrood) constituency are entirely within the city area. The Angus South (Holyrood) constituency includes north-eastern and north-western portions of the city area. All three constituencies are within the North East Scotland electoral region: Shona Robison (SNP) is the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Dundee East constituency; Joe Fitzpatrick (SNP) is the current MSP for the Dundee West constituency and Graeme Dey (SNP) is the current MSP for the Angus South constituency.\n\nDundee is also part of the pan-Scotland European Parliament constituency which elects seven Members of the European Parliament (MEP)s using the d'Hondt method of party-list proportional representation. Scotland returns two Labour MEPs, two SNP MEPs, one Conservative and Unionist MEP and one UKIP MEP, to the European Parliament.\n\nWinston Churchill served as one of two MPs for Dundee from 1908 to 1922.\n\nOn 18 September 2014, Dundee was one of four council areas to vote \"Yes\" in the Scottish independence referendum, with 57.3% voting \"Yes\" on a 78.8% turnout. With the highest Yes vote for any local authority in Scotland, some in the Yes Scotland campaign nicknamed Dundee the 'Yes City', including former First Minister Alex Salmond.\n\nDundee sits on the north bank of the Firth of Tay on the eastern, North Sea Coast of Scotland. The city lies NNE of Edinburgh and NNW of London. The built-up area occupies a roughly rectangular shape long by wide, aligned in an east to west direction and occupies an area of . The town is bisected by a line of hills stretching from Balgay Hill (elevation of 143 m) in the west end of the city, through the Dundee Law (174 m) which occupies the centre of the built up area, to Gallow Hill (83 m), between Baxter Park and the Eastern Cemetery. North of this ridge lies a valley through which cuts the Dighty Water burn, the elevation falling to around 45 m. North of the Dighty valley lie the Sidlaw Hills, the most prominent hill being Craigowl Hill (455 m).\n\nThe western and eastern boundaries of the city are marked by two burns that are tributaries of the River Tay. On the western-most boundary of the city, the Lochee burn meets the Fowlis burn, forming the Invergowrie burn, which meets the Tay at Invergowrie basin. The Dighty Water enters Dundee from the village of Strathmartine and marks the boundaries of a number of northern districts of the city, joining the Tay between Barnhill and Monifieth. The Scouring burn in the west end of the city and Dens Burn in the east, both of which played important roles in the industrial development of the city, have now been culverted over.\n\nThe city lies within the Sidlaw-Ochil anticline, and the predominant bedrock type is Old Red Sandstone of the Arbuthnott-Garvock group. Differential weathering of a series of igneous intrusions has yielded a number of prominent hills in the landscape, most notably the Dundee Law (a late Silurian/early Devonian Mafic rock intrusion) and Balgay hill (a Felsic rock intrusion of similar age). In the east of the city, in Craigie and Broughty Ferry, the bedrock geology is of extrusive rocks, including mafic lava and tuff.\n\nThe land surrounding Dundee, particularly that in the lower lying areas to the west and east of the city, bears high quality soil that is particularly suitable for arable farming. It is predominantly of a brown forest soil type with some gleying, the lower parts being formed from raised beach sands and gravels derived from Old Red Sandstone and lavas.\n\nVery little of pre-Reformation Dundee remains, the destruction suffered in the War of the Rough Wooing being almost total, with only scattered, roofless shells remaining. The area occupied by the medieval burgh of Dundee extends between East Port and West Port, which formerly held the gates to the walled city. The shoreline has been altered considerably since the early 19th century through development of the harbour area and land reclamation. Several areas on the periphery of the burgh saw industrial development with the building of textile mills from the end of the 18th century. Their placement was dictated by the need for a water supply for the modern steam powered machinery, and areas around the Lochee Burn (Lochee), Scouring Burn (Blackness) and Dens Burn (Dens Road area) saw particular concentrations of mills. The post war period saw expansion of industry to estates along the Kingsway.\n\nWorking class housing spread rapidly and without control throughout the Victorian era, particularly in the Hawkhill, Blackness Road, Dens Road and Hilltown areas. Despite the comparative wealth of Victorian Dundee as a whole, living standards for the working classes were very poor. A general lack of town planning coupled with the influx of labour during the expansion of the jute industry resulted in insanitary, squalid and cramped housing for much of the population. While gradual improvements and slum clearance began in the late 19th century, the building of the groundbreaking Logie housing estate marked the beginning of Dundee's expansion through the building of planned housing estates, under the vision of city architect James Thomson, whose legacy also includes the housing estate of Craigiebank and the beginnings of an improved transport infrastructure by planning the Kingsway bypass.\n\nModernisation of the city centre continued in the post-war period. The mediaeval Overgate was demolished in the early 1960s to make way for a shopping centre, followed by construction of the inner ring road and the Wellgate Shopping Centre. The Tay Road Bridge, completed in 1966 had as its northern landfall the docklands of central Dundee, and the new associated road system resulted in the city centre being cut off from the river. An acute shortage of housing in the late 1940s was addressed by a series of large housing estates built in the northern environs including the Fintry, Craigie, Charleston and Douglas areas in the 1950s and early 1960s. These were followed by increasingly cost-effective and sometimes poorly planned housing in throughout the 1960s. Much of this, in particular the high-rise blocks of flats at Lochee, Kirkton, Trottick, Whitfield, Ardler and Menzieshill, and the prefabricated Skarne housing blocks at Whitfield, have been demolished since the 1990s or are scheduled for future demolition.\n\nThe climate, like the rest of lowland Scotland, is Oceanic (Köppen-Geiger classification Cfb). Mean temperature and rainfall are typical for the east coast of Scotland, and with the city's sheltered estuarine position, mean daily maxima are slightly higher than coastal areas to the North, particularly in spring and summer. The summers are still chilly when compared with similar latitudes in continental Europe, something compensated for by the mild winters, similar to the rest of the British Isles. The nearest official Met Office weather station is Mylnefield, Invergowrie which is about west of the City Centre.\n\nA record high of was recorded in July 2013. The warmest month was July 2006, with an average temperature of (mean maximum , mean minimum ). In an 'average' year the warmest day should reach , and in total just 1.63 days should equal or exceed a temperature of per year, illustrating the rarity of such warmth.\n\nDundee's recorded population reached a peak of 182,204 at the 1971 census.\n\nAccording to the 2001 census, the City of Dundee had a population of 154,674. A more recent population estimate of the City of Dundee has been recorded at 156,561 in 2012. The demographic make-up of the population is much in line with the rest of Scotland. The age group from 30 to 44 forms the largest portion of the population (20%). The median age of males and females living in Dundee was 37 and 40 years, respectively, compared to 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland.\n\nThe place of birth of the town's residents was 94.16% United Kingdom (including 87.85% from Scotland), 0.42% Republic of Ireland, 1.33% from other European Union (EU) countries, and 3.09% from elsewhere in the world. The economic activity of residents aged 16–74 was 35.92% in full-time employment, 10.42% in part-time employment, 4.25% self-employed, 5.18% unemployed, 7.82% students with jobs, 4.73% students without jobs, 15.15% retired, 4.54% looking after home or family, 7.92% permanently sick or disabled, and 4.00% economically inactive for other reasons. Compared with the average demography of Scotland, Dundee has both low proportions of people born outside the United Kingdom and for people over 75 years old.\n\nNatives of Dundee are called Dundonians and are often recognisable by their distinctive dialect of Scots as well as their accent, which most noticeably substitutes the monophthong /ɛ/ (pronounced \"eh\") in place of the diphthong /aj/ (pronounced \"ai\"). Dundee, and Scotland more generally, saw rapid population increase at end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century, with the city's population increasing from 12,400 in 1751 to 30,500 in 1821. Of particular significance was an influx of Irish workers in the early to mid-19th century, attracted by the prospect of employment in the textiles industries. In 1851, 18.9% of people living in Dundee were of Irish birth.\n\nThe city has also attracted immigrants from Italy, fleeing poverty and famine, in the 19th century Jews, fleeing from the Russia controlled portions of partitioned Poland and from German occupation in the 20th. Today, Dundee has a sizeable ethnic minority population, and has around (4.0%) 4,000 Asian residents which is the fourth-largest Asian community in Scotland. The city also has 1.0% of residents from a Black/African/Caribbean background.\n\nDundee has a higher proportion of university students – one in seven of the population – than any other town in Europe, except Heidelberg. The 14.2% come from all around the world to attend the local universities and colleges. Dundee is a major attraction for Northern Irish students who make up 5% of the total student population. The city's universities are believed to hold the highest percentage of Northern Irish students outside of Northern Ireland and have a big impact on the local economy and culture. However, this has declined in recent years due to the increase of tuition fees for students elsewhere in the UK. Dundee also has a lot of students from abroad, mostly from the Republic of Ireland and other EU countries but with an increasing number from countries from the Far East and Nigeria.\n\nThe period following World War II was notable for the transformation of the city's economy. While jute still employed one-fifth of the working population, new industries were attracted and encouraged. NCR Corporation selected Dundee as the base of operations for the UK in late 1945, primarily because of the lack of damage the city had sustained in the war, good transport links and high productivity from long hours of sunshine. Production started in the year before the official opening of the plant on 11 June 1947. A fortnight after the 10th anniversary of the plant the 250,000th cash register was produced.\n\nBy the 1960s, NCR had become the principal employer of the city producing cash registers, and later ATMs, at several of its Dundee plants. The firm developed magnetic-strip readers for cash registers and produced early computers. Astral, a Dundee-based firm that manufactured and sold refrigerators and spin dryers was merged into Morphy Richards and rapidly expanded to employ over 1,000 people. The development in Dundee of a Michelin tyre-production facility helped to absorb the unemployment caused by the decline of the jute industry, particularly with the abolition of the jute control by the Board of Trade on 30 April 1969.\n\nEmployment in Dundee changed dramatically during the 1980s with the loss of nearly 10,000 manufacturing jobs due to closure of the shipyards, cessation of carpet manufacturing and the disappearance of the jute trade. To combat growing unemployment and declining economic conditions, Dundee was declared an Enterprise Zone in January 1984. In 1983, the first Sinclair ZX Spectrum home computers were produced in Dundee by Timex. In the same year the company broke production records, despite a sit-in by workers protesting against job cuts and plans to demolish one of the factory buildings to make way for a supermarket. Timex closed its Dundee plant in 1993 following an acrimonious six-month industrial dispute.\n\nDundee is a regional employment and education centre, with around 325,000 people within 30 minutes' drive of the city centre and 860,000 people within one hour. Many people from North East Fife, Angus and Perth and Kinross commute to the city. As of 2015, there were 395 employers who employed 250 or more staff; over a five-year period (2011-2015) the number of registered enterprises in Dundee increased by 20.9% from 2,655 to 3,210. The largest employers in the city are NHS Tayside, Dundee City Council, University of Dundee, Tayside Contracts, Tesco, D. C. Thomson & Co and BT.\n\nOther employers include limited and private companies such as NCR, Michelin, Alliance Trust, Aviva, Royal Bank of Scotland, Asda, Stagecoach Strathtay, Tokheim, Scottish Citylink, C J Lang & Son (SPAR Scotland), Joinery and Timber Creations, HBOS, Debenhams, Xplore Dundee, and W. L. Gore and Associates. Between 2009 and 2014 the hardest-hit sectors, in terms of jobs, were Information and Communication, Construction and Manufacturing which each lost around 500 full-time jobs. By contrast, the Professional, Scientific and Technical sector saw an upsurge in jobs in addition to the Business Administration and Support Service sector which increased by approximately 1,000 full-time and 300 part-time jobs in the same six-year period. Gross median weekly earnings of full-time employees in Dundee in 2015 was £523.50; men received £563.40 and women £451.80. Gross weekly pay for all employees in Dundee has increased from £325.00 in 2000 to £380.00 in 2015.\n\nThe biomedical and biotechnology sectors, including start-up biomedical companies arising from university research, employ just under 1,000 people directly and nearly 2,000 indirectly. Information technology and Video game development have been important industries in the city for more than 20 years. Rockstar North, developer of \"Lemmings\" and the \"Grand Theft Auto\" series was founded in Dundee as DMA Design by David Jones; an undergraduate of the Abertay University. Other game development studios in Dundee include Denki, Ruffian Games, Dynamo Games, 4J Studios, Cohort Studios amongst others.\n\nDundee is also a key retail destination for North East Scotland and has been ranked 4th in Retail Rankings in Scotland. The city centre offers a wide variety of retailers, department stores and independent/specialist stores. The Murraygate and High Street forms the main pedestrian area and is home to a number of main anchors such as Marks and Spencer, Accessorise and Zara. The main pedestrian area also connects the two large shopping centres; the Overgate Centre which is anchored by Debenhams, H&M, Next, Argos, and The Perfume Shop and the Wellgate Centre by Home Bargains, B&M, Superdrug, Iceland, Holland & Barrett, Poundland, Savers, The Works, Hydro Electric, Bright house, Other retail areas in the city include Gallagher Retail Park, Kingsway East Retail Park and Kingsway West Retail Park.\n\nThe city and its landscape are dominated by The Law and the Firth of Tay. The Law, a large hill to the north of the City Centre was the site of an Iron Age Hill Fort, upon which the Law War Memorial, designed by Thomas Braddock, was erected in 1921 to commemorate the fallen of World War I. The waterfront, much altered by reclamation in the 19th century, retains several of the docks that once were the hub of the jute and whaling industries, including the Camperdown and Victoria Docks. The Victoria Dock is the home of the frigate HMS \"Unicorn\" and the North Carr Lightship, while Captain Scott's RRS \"Discovery\" occupies Craig Pier, from where the ferries to Fife once sailed.\n\nThe oldest building in the city is St Mary's Tower, which dates from the late 15th century. This forms part of the City Churches, which consist of St Clement's Church, dating to 1787–8 and built by Samuel Bell, Old St Paul's and St David's Church, built in 1841–42 by William Burn, and St Mary's Church, rebuilt in 1843–44, also by Burn, following a fire. Other significant churches in the city include the Gothic Revival Episcopal Cathedral of St Paul's, built by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1853 on the former site of Dundee Castle in the High Street, and the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St Andrew, built in 1835 by George Mathewson in Nethergate.\n\nAs a result of the destruction suffered during the Rough Wooing, little of the mediaeval city (aside from St Mary's Tower) remains and the earliest surviving domestic structures date from the Early Modern Era. A notable example is the Wishart Arch (or East Port) in Cowgate. It is the last surviving portion of the city walls. Dating from prior to 1548, it owes its continued existence to its association with the Protestant martyr George Wishart, who is said to have preached to plague victims from the East Port in 1544. Another is the building complex on the High Street known as Gardyne's Land, parts of which date from around 1560. The Howff burial ground in the northern part of the City Centre also dates from this time; it was given to the city by Mary Queen of Scots in 1564, having previously served as the grounds of a Franciscan abbey.\n\nSeveral castles can be found in Dundee, mostly from the Early Modern Era. The earliest parts of Mains Castle in Caird Park were built by David Graham in 1562 on the site of a hunting lodge of 1460. Dudhope Castle, originally the seat of the Scrymgeour family, dates to the late 16th century and was built on the site of a keep of 1460. Claypotts Castle, a striking Z plan castle in West Ferry, was built by John Strachan and dates from 1569–1588. In 1495 Broughty Castle was built and remained in use as a major defensive structure until 1932, playing a role in the Anglo-Scottish Wars and the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The castle stands on a shallow tip projecting into the Firth, alongside two beaches, one of sand, the other of pebbles. The ruins of Powrie Castle, north of Fintry, date from the 16th-century castle north.\n\nNorth of the City Churches, at the end of Reform Street, lies the High School of Dundee, built in 1829–34 by George Angus in a Greek Revival style. Another school building of note is Morgan Academy on Forfar Road, built in 1863, designed by John Dick Peddie in a Dutch Gothic style.\n\nDundee's industrial history as a centre for textile production is apparent throughout the city. Numerous former jute mills remain standing and while some lay derelict, many have been converted for other uses. Of particular note are the Tay Works, built by the Gilroy Brothers c.1850–1865, Camperdown Works in Lochee, which built and owned by Cox Brothers, one of Europe's largest jute manufacturing companies, and begun in 1849, and Upper Dens Mill and Lower Dens Works, built by the Baxter Brothers in the mid-19th century.\n\nA more recent landmark is the Tower Building of the University of Dundee built between 1959 and 1961. At the time of its construction only the Old Steeple was taller in the city. The Tower was built to replace the original college buildings which stood on the site. The building houses the university's main administration and includes galleries and the university's Archive, Records Management and Museum Services.\n\nMany 1960s landmark multi-storey housing buildings were demolished in the last decade. The former Tayside House block, nicknamed 'Faulty Towers' by many local people, was demolished in 2013 as part of the waterfront redevelopment program. According to the architectural historian Charles McKean and his co-authors of Lost Dundee, the best views in the city were from Tayside House, because these were the only views from the building could not be seen.\n\nDundee is served by the A90 road which connects the city to the M90 and Perth in the west, and Forfar and Aberdeen in the north. The part of the road that is in the city is a dual carriageway and forms the city's main bypass on its north side, known as the Kingsway. East of the A90's Forfar Road junction, the Kingsway East continues as the A972, and meets the A92 at the Scott Fyffe roundabout. Travelling east, the A92 connects the city to Arbroath and Montrose and to the south with Fife via the Tay Road Bridge.\n\nThe A930 links the city with coastal settlements to the east, including, Monifieth and Carnoustie. Progressing westward from where the A92 meets the Tay Road Bridge at the Riverside Roundabout, the A85 follows the southern boundary of the city along Riverside Drive and towards the A90 at the Swallow Roundabout. The A85 multiplexes with the A90 and diverges again at Perth.\n\nAlso meeting the A92 and A85 at the Riverside Roundabout is the A991 Inner Ring Road, which surrounds the perimeter of the city centre, returning to the A92 on the east side of the Tay Road Bridge. The A923 Dundee to Dunkeld road meets the A991 at the Dudhope Roundabout, and the A929 links the A991 to the A90 via Forfar Road.\n\nDundee has an extensive network of bus routes. The Seagate bus station is the city's main terminus for journeys out of town. Xplore Dundee operates most of the intra-city services, with other more rural services operated by Stagecoach Strathtay. The city's two railway stations are the main Dundee Station near the waterfront, which is currently undergoing reconstruction while remaining open, and the much smaller Broughty Ferry Station at the eastern end of the city.\n\nThere are other nearby stations at Invergowrie, Balmossie and Monifieth. Passenger services at Dundee are provided by Abellio ScotRail, CrossCountry, Caledonian Sleeper and Virgin Trains East Coast. No freight trains serve the city since the Freightliner terminal in Dundee was closed in the 1980s. There are also many intercity bus services offered by Megabus, Citylink and National Express.\n\nDundee Airport offers commercial flights to London Stansted Airport. Flights to Birmingham Airport and Belfast City were discontinued in December 2012. The airport is capable of serving small aircraft and is located west of the city centre, adjacent to the River Tay. The nearest major international airport is Edinburgh Airport, to the south.\n\nThe nearest international passenger seaport is Aberdeen.\n\nThe cargo port of Dundee is one of the largest economic generators in the city and is operated by Forth Ports. Seafarers arriving at the port are given welfare and pastoral assistance by seafarers charity Apostleship of the Sea.\n\nDundee is home to two universities and a student population of approximately 20,000.\n\nThe University of Dundee became an independent entity in 1967, after 70 years of being incorporated into the University of St Andrews. It was founded in 1881 by Mary Ann Baxter and her distant cousin John Boyd Baxter as University College, Dundee, and teaching began in 1883. It fully merged with the University of St Andrews in 1897 and was reorganised as Queen's College, Dundee in 1954. Significant research in biomedical fields and oncology is carried out in the \"College of Life Sciences\". The University is also home to the renowned Dundee Law School, situated in the Scrymgeour Building on the main campus and one of the UK's top medical schools, based at the city's Ninewells Hospital. The university also incorporates the Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design and the teacher training college.\n\nThe Abertay University was founded as Dundee Institute of Technology in 1988. Previously, the buildings formed Bell Street Technical College, a further education college. It was granted university status in 1994 under the Further and Higher Education Act, 1992. The university is noted for its computing and creative technology courses, particularly in computer games technology. and is where the makers of Grand Theft Auto started out.\n\nDundee College is the city's umbrella further education college, which was established in 1985 as an institution of higher education and vocational training. As of 2013 it merged with Angus College in Arbroath, to become Dundee and Angus College (D&A College).\n\nThe Al-Maktoum College of Higher Education was established in Dundee in Blackness Road in 2002. It is a research-led institution of higher education which are currently offering programmes accredited by SQA in the study of Islam and Muslims, Arabic language and Islamic Economics and Finance. It is an independent institution. It is named after its patron, Hamdan bin Rashid Al Maktoum.\n\nSchools in Dundee have a pupil enrolment of over 20,300. There are 37 primary state schools and 9 secondary state schools in the city. There are 11 primary and 2 secondary Roman Catholic denominational schools which, as in the rest of Scotland, are open to children of all denominations. The remainder are non-denominational. There is also one specialist school that caters for pupils with learning difficulties aged between five and 18 from Dundee and the surrounding area.\n\nDundee has one independent school, the High School of Dundee, which was founded in the 13th century by the Abbot and monks of Lindores Abbey. The current building was designed by George Angus in a Greek Revival style and built in 1832–34. Early students included Thomas Thomson and Hector Boece, as well as the brothers James, John and Robert Wedderburn who were the authors of \"The Gude and Godlie Ballatis\", used early in the Scottish Reformation as a vehicle to spread Protestant theology. It was the earliest reformed school in Scotland, having adopted the new religion in 1554. According to Blind Harry's largely apocryphal work \"The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace\", William Wallace was also educated in Dundee.\n\nThe Church of Scotland Presbytery of Dundee is responsible for overseeing the worship of 37 congregations in and around the Dundee area, although changing population patterns have led to some of the churches becoming linked charges. Due to their city centre location, the City Churches, Dundee Parish Church (St Mary's) and the Steeple Church, are the most prominent Church of Scotland buildings in Dundee. They are on the site of the medieval parish kirk of St Mary, of which only the 15th-century west tower survives. The attached church was once the largest parish church in medieval Scotland. Dundee was unusual among Scottish medieval burghs in having two parish kirks; the second, dedicated to St Clement, has disappeared, but its site was approximately that of the present City Square. Other presbyterian groups include the Free Church which meet at St. Peters (the historic church of Robert Murray M'Cheyne) where David Robertson and Sinclair B. Ferguson regularly preach.\n\nIn the Middle Ages Dundee was also the site of houses of the Dominicans (Blackfriars), and Franciscans (Greyfriars), and had a number of hospitals and chapels. These establishments were sacked during the Scottish Reformation, in the mid-16th century, and were reduced to burial grounds, now Barrack Street (also referred to as the Dek-tarn street) and The Howff burial ground, respectively.\n\nSt. Paul's Cathedral is the seat of the Scottish Episcopal Diocese of Brechin. It is charged with overseeing the worship of 9 congregations in the city, as well as a further 17 in Angus, the Carse of Gowrie and parts of Aberdeenshire. The diocese is led by Bishop Nigel Peyton. St. Andrew's Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Dunkeld, led by Bishop Stephen Robson. The diocese is responsible for overseeing 15 congregations in Dundee and 37 in the surrounding area, including St Mary, Our Lady of Victories Church in the city.\n\nThere are Methodist, Baptist, Congregationalist, United Reformed Church, Pentecostalist and Salvation Army churches in the city, and non-mainstream Christian groups are also well represented, including the Unitarians, the Society of Friends, the Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-day Adventists, Christadelphians, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\n\nMuslims are served by the Dundee Central Mosque built in 2000 to replace their former premises on the Hilltown. There are three other mosques in the city including;\nJamia Masjid Tajdare Madina on Victoria Road, Jame Masjid Bilal on Dura Street and Al Maktoum Mosque on Wilkie's Lane. Alongside these there is an Islamic Society on the University of Dundee campus.\n\nThe Sikh community is served by the Guru Nanak Gurdwara on Victoria Road, which serves its community in Dundee.\n\nA recorded Jewish community has existed in the city since the early 19th century. There is a small Orthodox synagogue at Dudhope Park that was built in the 1960s, with the Hebrew Burial Grounds located three miles (5 km) to the east. Samye Dzong Dundee is a Buddhist Temple based in Reform Street. There is also a Hindu mandir in Taylor's Lane situated in the West End of the city.\n\nDundee is home to a full-time repertory ensemble, which originated in 1939. One of its alumni, Hollywood actor Brian Cox, is a native of the city. The Dundee Repertory Theatre, built in 1982, is also the base for the Scottish Dance Theatre company.\n\nDundee's principal concert auditorium, the Caird Hall (named after its benefactor, the jute baron James Key Caird) in the City Square regularly hosts the Royal Scottish National Orchestra. Various smaller venues host local and international musicians during Dundee's annual Jazz, Guitar and Blues Festivals. The Dundee Contemporary Arts, which opened in 1999 in the city's cultural quarter, is home to both an art gallery and art-house cinema.\n\nDundee has hosted the National Mod a number of times – 1902, 1913, 1937, 1959 and 1974.\n\nDundee Contemporary Arts (abbreviated DCA) is an international art centre in the Nethergate close to Dundee Rep, which houses two contemporary art galleries, a two-screen cinema, a print studio, a visual research centre and a café bar.\n\nThe city's main museum and art gallery, McManus Galleries, is in Albert Square. The exhibits include a collection of fine and decorative art, items from Dundee's history and natural history artefacts. Britain's only full-time public observatory, Mills Observatory at the summit of the city's Balgay Hill, was given to the city by linen manufacturer and keen amateur scientist John Mills in 1935. Sensation Science Centre in the Greenmarket is a science centre based on the five senses with a series of interactive shows and exhibits. Verdant Works is a museum dedicated to the once dominant jute industry in Dundee and is based in a former jute mill. The University of Dundee also runs several public museums and galleries, including the D'Arcy Thompson Zoology Museum and the Tayside Medical History Museum. The university, through Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art and Design also offers the Cooper Gallery for contemporary art, and its archives including: the abcD (artists' books collection Dundee); the REWIND Archive (video art collection); and the Richard Demarco Digital Archive. A new £80 million centre for art and design known as the \"V&A at Dundee\" is to be built south of Craig Harbour onto the River Tay for completion in 2017. The new museum may bring another 500,000 extra visitors to the city and create up to 900 jobs.\n\nThe city's archival records are mostly kept by two archives: Dundee City Archives, operated by Dundee City Council and the University of Dundee's Archive Services. Dundee City Archives holds the official records of the city and of the former Tayside Regional Council. The archive also holds the records of various people, groups and organisations connected to the city. The university's Archive Services hold a wide range of material relating to the university and its predecessor institutions and to individuals associated with the university, such as D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson. Archive Services also holds the archives of several individuals, businesses and organisations based in Dundee and the surrounding area. The records held include a substantial number of business archives relating to the jute and linen industry in Dundee; records of other businesses including the archives of the Alliance Trust and the department store G. L. Wilson; the records of the Brechin Diocese of the Scottish Episcopal Church; and the NHS Tayside Archive. The same archive also holds the Michael Peto collection which includes thousands of the photojournalist's photographs, negatives, slides, publications and papers.\n\nDundee is home to DC Thomson & Son Ltd, established in 1905, which produces over 200 million magazines, newspapers and comics every year; these include \"The Beano\", \"The Dandy\" and \"The Press and Journal\". Dundee has a strong literary heritage, with several authors having been born, lived or studied in the city. These include A. L. Kennedy, Rosamunde Pilcher, Kate Atkinson, Thomas Dick, Mary Shelley, Mick McCluskey, John Burnside and Neil Forsyth. The Dundee International Book Prize is a biennial competition open to new authors, offering a prize of £10,000 and publication by Polygon Books. Past winners have included Andrew Murray Scott, Claire-Marie Watson and Malcolm Archibald. William McGonagall, regularly cited as the \"world's worst poet\", worked and wrote in the city, often giving performances of his work in pubs and bars. Many of his poems are about the city and events therein, such as his work \"The Tay Bridge Disaster\". Dundee's poetic heritage is represented by the 2013 poetry anthology 'Whaleback City' edited by W. N. Herbert and Andy Jackson (Dundee University Press) containing poems by McGonagall, Don Paterson, Douglas Dunn, John Burnside and many others. City of Recovery Press was founded in Dundee, and has become a controversial figure in documenting the darker side of the city.\n\nDundee bid to be named 2017 UK City of Culture, and on 19 June 2013 was named as one of the four short-listed cities alongside Hull, Leicester and Swansea Bay. Ultimately, Dundee's bid was unsuccessful, with Hull winning the contest. Dundee came fifth in a newspaper survey regarding numbers of cultural venues in the United Kingdom, ahead of other Scottish cities.\n\nDundee is also currently bidding to become the European Capital of Culture in 2023.\n\nThe Dundee Mountain Film Festival (DMFF), held in the last weekend of November, presents the best presenters and films of the year in mountaineering, mountain culture and adventure sport, along with an art and trade exhibition.\nDMFF is also one of the members of International Alliance for Mountain Film (IAMF) among other important international mountain film festivals.\n\nDundee Contemporary Arts hosts an annual horror film festival called \"Dundead\", which started in 2011.\n\nThe city also has two Multiplex cinemas, Odeon and Cineworld.\n\nPopular music groups such as the 1970s soul-funk outfit Average White Band, the Associates, the band Spare Snare, Danny Wilson, The Hazey Janes, and the Indie rock bands The View and The Law are from Dundee. Musician, songwriter and performer Michael Marra was born and raised in Dundee. Ricky Ross of Deacon Blue and singer-songwriter KT Tunstall are former pupils of the High School of Dundee, although Tunstall is not a native of the city. The Northern Irish indie rock band Snow Patrol was formed by students at the University of Dundee. Brian Molko, lead singer of Placebo, grew up in the city as did Ian Cussick, singer of Lake. At the end of June, Dundee hosts an annual blues festival known as the \"Dundee Blues Bonanza\".\n\nDundee is home to one of 11 BBC Scotland broadcasting centres, located within the Nethergate Centre. STV North's Tayside news and advertising operations are based in the Seabraes area of the city, from where an \"STV News Tayside\" opt-out bulletin is broadcast, (though not on Digital Satellite), within the nightly regional news programme, \"STV News at Six\". The city also had a community internet TV station called The Dundee Channel which was launched on 1 September 2009.\n\nThe city has three local radio stations. Radio Tay was launched on 17 October 1980. The station split frequencies in January 1995 launching Tay FM for a younger audience and Tay AM playing classic hits. In 1999, Discovery 102 was launched, later to be renamed Wave 102.\n\nDundee has two professional football clubs: Dundee, founded in 1893, and Dundee United, founded in 1909 as Dundee Hibernian. Dundee play in the Scottish Premiership and Dundee United play in the Scottish Championship. Their grounds Dens Park and Tannadice Park are just 100 metres apart, closer together than any other football stadiums in the UK. The Dundee Derby is one of the most highly anticipated fixtures in Scottish football. Dundee is one of four British cities to have produced two European Cup semi-finalists. Dundee lost to A.C. Milan in 1963 and Dundee United lost to A.S. Roma in 1984. Dundee also reached the semi-finals of the forerunner to the UEFA Cup in 1968 and Dundee United were runners-up in the UEFA Cup in 1987. There are also seven junior football teams in the area: Dundee North End, East Craigie, Lochee Harp, Lochee United, Dundee Violet, Broughty Athletic and Downfield.\n\nDundee Stars, the main ice hockey team, play at the Dundee Ice Arena. The team joined the Elite League in the 2010/2011 season. They are one of four professional ice hockey teams in Scotland, and play against teams from England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the Elite League. The majority of the players are from Canada and the United States. There are also two amateur ice hockey teams, Dundee Tigers and Dundee Comets, who both play in the Scottish National League.\n\nThe city is also home to five rugby union teams – Dundee High School Former Pupils rugby club who play in the RBS Premiership Division One; Morgan Academy Former Pupils in the RBS Premiership Division Three; Harris Academy Former Pupils in the RBS Caledonian Division Two Midlands and Panmure R.F.C. and Stobswell R.F.C. both in the RBS Caledonian Division Three Midlands.\n\nLocal sports clubs include Dundee Handball Club, Grove Menzieshill Hockey Club; Dundee Wanderers Hockey Club, Dundee Northern Lights floorball club, Dundee Hawkhill Harriers, Dundee City Aquatics, Dundee Hurricanes and Dundee & Angus Radio Controlled Car Klub (DARCCK).\n\nThe new £36 million Olympia leisure centre with multi-storey car park was scheduled to open in late 2012, but only three weeks from the original opening date, the date was pushed back by a further six months.\n\nThere is a velodrome, Caird Park Velodrome.\n\nDundee and the surrounding area is supplied with water by Scottish Water. Dundee, along with parts of Perthshire and Angus is supplied from Lintrathen and Backwater reservoirs in Glen Isla. Electricity distribution is by Scottish Hydro Electric plc, part of the Scottish and Southern Energy group.\n\nWaste management is handled by Dundee City Council. There is a kerbside recycling scheme that currently only serves 15,500 households in Dundee. Cans, glass and plastic bottles are collected on a weekly basis. Compostable material and non-recyclable material are collected on alternate weeks. Paper is collected for recycling on a four-weekly basis.\n\nRecycling centres and points are at a number of locations in Dundee. Items accepted include steel and aluminium cans, cardboard, paper, electrical equipment, engine oil, fridges and freezers, garden waste, gas bottles, glass, liquid food and drinks cartons, plastic bottles, plastic carrier bags, rubble, scrap metal, shoes and handbags, spectacles, textiles, tin foil, wood and yellow pages. Recent figures taken in 2008, suggest the city council has a recycling rate of 36.1%.\n\nLaw enforcement is provided by Police Scotland. The headquarters of the Dundee Branch of Police Scotland is situated in West Bell Street. There are also four police stations which serve the city: Maryfield, Lochee, Downfield and Longhaugh.\n\nHealthcare is supplied in the area by NHS Tayside. Ninewells Hospital, is the only hospital with an accident and emergency department in the area. Primary Health Care in Dundee is supplied by a number of General Practices. Dundee is also served by the East Central Region of the Scottish Ambulance Service which covers the city, Tayside and Kingdom of Fife. There is one ambulance station for the city; on West School Road.\n\nThe Scottish Fire and Rescue Service operate three fire stations, covering the city and surrounding villages. The main station is at Blackness Road and there is a control room at Macalpine Road fire station.\n\nChronologically:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8829", "title": "Do Not Adjust Your Set", "text": "Do Not Adjust Your Set\n\nDo Not Adjust Your Set (DNAYS) was a television series produced originally by Rediffusion, London, then, by the fledgling Thames Television for British commercial television channel ITV from 26 December 1967 to 14 May 1969. The show took its name from the message (frequently seen on the TV screen in those days) which was displayed when there was a problem with transmission.\n\nIt included early appearances of Denise Coffey, David Jason, Eric Idle, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin; the last three became members of the Monty Python comedy troupe soon afterwards. Although originally conceived as a children's programme, it quickly acquired a following amongst many adults, including future Pythons John Cleese and Graham Chapman (as mentioned by Cleese himself in the \"Paying my ex-wife\" stage performance tour, October 2010).\n\nSatirical comedy/art/pop group The Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band also performed a song or two in each programme and frequently appeared as extras in sketches. The programme itself comprised a series of frequently satirical sketches, often presented in a bizarre, surreal and disjointed style which anticipates \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", which followed five months after the last episode of \"DNAYS\". Strange animations between sketches were crafted for the final episodes by the then-unknown Terry Gilliam, who soon graduated to \"Python\" with Palin, Jones and Idle – part of Gilliam's \"Christmas cards\" animation reappeared there in the \"Joy to the World\" segment. \n\nOne long-running feature of the show was \"Captain Fantastic\", a superhero parody featuring David Jason in improbable and even macabre adventures against villainess Mrs. Black (Coffey). These segments were shot entirely on film, on location in London. The feature was so popular with the young audience that after DNAYS itself ended Captain Fantastic briefly continued on its own terms. In 1968, the feature won the show an international award, the Prix Jeunesse, in Munich.\n\n\nIn common with another important \"Monty Python\" predecessor, \"At Last the 1948 Show\", many episodes were wiped.\n\nNine of the 14 episodes from the first (Rediffusion) series were released on DVD in the UK and the US in August 2005. Both releases use the same NTSC Region 0 discs made from telerecordings of the original videotapes.\n\nThe episodes are renumbered 1 to 9, although, in fact they are episodes 1-2, 5-6, and 9-13 (a similar fault was made on the release of \"At Last the 1948 Show\"). The sole surviving episode from series 2 and \"Do Not Adjust Your Stocking\" were not included.\n\nThe packaging further implies that Gilliam's animations appear in these episodes, but they do not. Gilliam does appear as one of the additional writers in the credits for episodes three and four. The Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band is seen playing its song \"Death Cab for Cutie\" (also performed in The Beatles' film \"Magical Mystery Tour\") in the DVD, Episode 7.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8832", "title": "West Memphis Three", "text": "West Memphis Three\n\nThe West Memphis Three are three men who – while teenagers – were tried and convicted, in 1994, of the 1993 murders of three boys in West Memphis, Arkansas. Damien Echols was sentenced to death, Jessie Misskelley, Jr. was sentenced to life imprisonment plus two 20-year sentences, and Jason Baldwin was sentenced to life imprisonment. During the trial, the prosecution asserted that the children were killed as part of a Satanic ritual.\n\nA number of documentaries have explored the case. Celebrities and musicians have held fundraisers in the belief that the three young men convicted of the crime are innocent.\n\nIn July 2007, new forensic evidence was presented in the case. A status report jointly issued by the state and the defense team stated: \"Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.\" On October 29, 2007, the defense filed a \"Second Amended Writ of Habeas Corpus\", outlining the new evidence.\n\nFollowing a 2010 decision by the Arkansas Supreme Court regarding newly produced DNA evidence and potential juror misconduct, the West Memphis Three negotiated a plea bargain with prosecutors. On August 19, 2011, they entered Alford pleas, which allowed them to assert their innocence while acknowledging that prosecutors have enough evidence to convict them. Judge David Laser accepted the pleas and sentenced the three to time served. They were released with 10-year suspended sentences, having served 18 years and 78 days in prison.\n\nThree eight-year-old boys—Steve Branch, Michael Moore, and Christopher Byers—were reported missing on May 5, 1993. The first report to the police was made by Byers' adoptive father, John Mark Byers, around 7:00 pm. The boys were allegedly last seen together by three neighbors, who in affidavits told of seeing them playing together around 6:30 pm the evening they disappeared, and seeing Terry Hobbs, Steve Branch's stepfather, calling them to come home. Initial police searches made that night were limited. Friends and neighbors also conducted a search that night, which included a cursory visit to the location where the bodies were later found.\n\nA more thorough police search for the children began around 8:00 am on May 6, led by the Crittenden County Search and Rescue personnel. Searchers canvassed all of West Memphis but focused primarily on Robin Hood Hills, where the boys were reported last seen. Despite a shoulder-to-shoulder search of Robin Hood Hills by a human chain, searchers found no sign of the missing boys.\n\nAround 1:45 pm, juvenile Parole Officer Steve Jones spotted a boy's black shoe floating in a muddy creek that led to a major drainage canal in Robin Hood Hills. A subsequent search of the ditch revealed the bodies of three boys. They had been stripped naked and were hogtied with their own shoelaces: their right ankles tied to their right wrists behind their backs, the same with their left arms and legs. Their clothing was found in the creek, some of it twisted around sticks that had been thrust into the muddy ditch bed. The clothing was mostly turned inside-out; two pairs of the boys' underwear were never recovered. Christopher Byers had lacerations to various parts of his body, and mutilation of his scrotum and penis.\n\nThe autopsies, by the forensic pathologist Frank J. Peretti, indicated that Byers died of \"multiple injuries\", while Moore and Branch died of \"multiple injuries with drowning\".\n\nPolice initially suspected the boys had been raped; however, later expert testimony disputed this finding despite trace amounts of sperm DNA found on a pair of pants recovered from the scene. Prosecution experts claim Byers' wounds were the results of a knife attack and that he had been purposely castrated by the murderer; defense experts claim the injuries were more probably the result of post-mortem animal predation. Police believed the boys were assaulted and killed at the location where they were found; critics argued that the assault, at least, was unlikely to have occurred at the creek.\n\nByers was the only victim with drugs in his system; he was prescribed Ritalin (methylphenidate) in January 1993, as part of an attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder treatment. The initial autopsy report describes the drug as Carbamazepine, and that dosage was found to be at sub-therapeutic level. John Mark Byers said that Christopher Byers may not have taken his prescription on May 5, 1993.\n\nStevie Edward Branch, Christopher Byers, and Michael Moore, were all second graders at Weaver Elementary School. Each had achieved the rank of \"Wolf\" in the local Cub Scout pack, and they were best friends.\n\nStevie Branch (November 26, 1984 – May 5, 1993) was the son of Steven and Pamela Branch, who divorced when he was an infant. His mother was awarded custody and later married Terry Hobbs. Branch was eight years old, 4 ft. 2 tall, weighed 65 lbs, and had blond hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans and a white T-shirt, and riding a black and red bicycle. He was an honor student. He lived with his mother, Pamela Hobbs, his stepfather, Terry Hobbs, and a four-year-old half-sister, Amanda. Steve Edward Branch is buried in Mount Zion Cemetery in Steele, Missouri.\n\nChristopher Byers (June 23, 1984 – May 5, 1993) was born to Melissa DeFir and Ricky Murray. His parents divorced when he was four years old; shortly afterward, his mother married John Mark Byers, who adopted the boy. Byers was eight years old, 4 ft. tall, weighed 52 lbs, and had light brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue jeans, dark shoes, and a white long sleeved shirt. He lived with his mother, Sharon Melissa Byers, his adoptive father, John Mark Byers, and his stepbrother, Shawn Ryan Clark, aged 13. According to his mother, Christopher was a typical eight-year-old. \"He still believed in the Easter Bunny and Santa Claus\". Christopher Mark Byers is buried in Forest Hill Cemetery East in Memphis, Tennessee.\n\nMichael Moore (July 27, 1984 – May 5, 1993) was the son of Todd and Dana Moore. He was eight years old, 4 ft. 2 tall, weighed 55 lbs, and had brown hair. He was last seen wearing blue pants, a blue Boy Scouts of America shirt, and an orange and blue Boy Scout hat, and riding a light green bicycle. Moore enjoyed wearing his scout uniform even when he was not at meetings. He was considered the leader of the three. He lived with his parents and his nine-year-old sister, Dawn. James Michael Moore is buried in Crittenden Memorial Park Cemetery in Marion, Arkansas.\n\nIn 1994, a memorial was erected for the three murder victims. The memorial is located in the playground of Weaver Elementary School in West Memphis, where all three victims were second graders at the time of the crime. In May 2013, for the 20th anniversary of the slayings, Weaver Elementary School principal Sheila Grissom raised funds to refurbish the memorial.\n\nAt the time of their arrests, Jessie Misskelley, Jr. was 17 years old, Jason Baldwin was 16 years old, and Damien Echols was 18 years old.\n\nBaldwin and Echols had been previously arrested for vandalism and shoplifting, respectively, and Misskelley had a reputation for his temper and for engaging in fistfights with other teenagers at school. Misskelley and Echols had dropped out of high school; however, Baldwin earned high grades and demonstrated a talent for drawing and sketching, and was encouraged by one of his teachers to study graphic design in college. Echols and Baldwin were close friends, and bonded over their similar tastes in music and fiction, and over their shared distaste for the prevailing cultural climate of West Memphis, situated in the Bible Belt. Baldwin and Echols were acquainted with Misskelley from school, but were not close friends with him.\n\nEchols' family was poor and received frequent visits from social workers, and he rarely attended school. He and a girlfriend had run off and later broken into a trailer during a rain storm; they were arrested, though only Echols was charged with burglary.\n\nEchols spent several months in a mental institution in Arkansas and afterward received \"full disability\" status from the Social Security Administration. During Echols' trial, Dr. George W. Woods testified (for the defense) that Echols suffered from:\nserious mental illness characterized by grandiose and persecutory delusions, auditory and visual hallucinations, disordered thought processes, substantial lack of insight, and chronic, incapacitating mood swings.\n\nAt his death penalty sentencing hearing, Echols' psychologist reported that months before the murders, Echols had claimed that he obtains super powers by drinking human blood. At the time of his arrest, Echols was working part-time with a roofing company and expecting a child with his girlfriend, Domini Teer.\n\nEarly in the investigation, the WMPD briefly regarded two West Memphis teenagers as suspects. Chris Morgan and Brian Holland, both with drug offense histories, had abruptly departed for Oceanside, California, four days after the bodies were discovered. Morgan was presumed to be at least casually familiar with all three murdered boys, having previously driven an ice cream truck route in their neighborhood.\n\nArrested in Oceanside on May 17, 1993, Morgan and Holland both took polygraph exams administered by California police. Examiners reported that both men's charts indicated deception when they denied involvement in the murders. During subsequent questioning, Morgan claimed a long history of drug and alcohol use, along with blackouts and memory lapses. He claimed that he \"might have\" killed the victims but quickly recanted this part of his statement.\n\nCalifornia police sent blood and urine samples from Morgan and Holland to the WMPD, but there is no indication WMPD investigated Morgan or Holland as suspects following their arrest in California. The relevance of Morgan's recanted statement would later be debated in trial, but it was eventually barred from admission as evidence.\n\nThe citing of a black male as a possible alternate suspect was implied during the beginning of the Misskelley trial. According to local West Memphis police officers, on the evening of May 5, 1993, at 8:42 pm, workers in the Bojangles' restaurant located about a mile from the crime scene in Robin Hood Hills reported seeing a black male who seemed \"mentally disoriented\" inside the restaurant's ladies' room. The man was bleeding and had brushed against the restroom walls. Officer Regina Meeks responded to the call, taking the restaurant manager's report through the eatery's drive-through window. By then, the man had left, and police did not enter the restroom on that date.\n\nThe day after the victims' bodies were found, Bojangles' manager Marty King, thinking there was a possible connection to the bloody man found in the bathroom, reported the incident to police officers who then inspected the ladies' room. King gave the officers a pair of sunglasses he thought the man had left behind, and the detectives took some blood samples from the walls and tiles of the restroom. Police detective Bryn Ridge testified that he later lost those blood scrapings. A hair identified as belonging to a black male was later recovered from a sheet wrapped around one of the victims.\n\nPolice officers James Sudbury and Steve Jones felt that the crime had \"cult\" overtones, and that Damien Echols might be a suspect because he had an interest in occultism, and Jones felt Echols was capable of murdering children. The police interviewed Echols on May 7, two days after the bodies were discovered. During a polygraph examination, he denied any involvement. The polygraph examiner claimed that Echols' chart indicated deception. On May 9, during a formal interview by Detective Bryn Ridge, Echols mentioned that one of the victims had wounds to the genitals; law enforcement viewed this knowledge as incriminating.\n\nAfter a month had passed with little progress in the case, police continued to focus their investigation upon Echols, interrogating him more frequently than any other person. Nonetheless, they claimed he was not regarded as a direct suspect but a source of information.\n\nOn June 3, the police interrogated Jessie Misskelley, Jr. Despite his reported IQ of 72 (categorizing him as borderline intellectual functioning) and his status as a minor, Miskelley was questioned alone; his parents were not present during the interrogation. Misskelley's father gave permission for Misskelley to go with police but did not explicitly give permission for his son to be questioned or interrogated. Misskelley was questioned for roughly 12 hours. Only two segments, totaling 46 minutes, were recorded. Misskelley quickly recanted his confession, citing intimidation, coercion, fatigue, and veiled threats from police. Misskelley specifically said he was \"scared of the police\" during this confession.\n\nThough he was informed of his Miranda rights, Misskelley later claimed he did not fully understand them. In 1996, the Arkansas Supreme Court ruled that Misskelley's confession was voluntary and that he did, in fact, understand the Miranda warning and its consequences. Portions of Misskelley's statements to the police were leaked to the press and reported on the front page of the Memphis \"Commercial Appeal\" before any of the trials began.\n\nShortly after Misskelley's first confession, police arrested Echols and his close friend Baldwin. Eight months after his original confession, on February 17, 1994, Misskelley made another statement to police. His lawyer, Dan Stidham, remained in the room and continually advised Misskelley not to say anything. Misskelley ignored this advice and went on to detail how the boys were abused and murdered. Stidham, who was later elected to a municipal judgeship, has written a detailed critique of what he asserts are major police errors and misconceptions during their investigation.\n\nVicki Hutcheson, a new resident of West Memphis, would play an important role in the investigation, though she would later recant her testimony, claiming her statements were fabricated due in part to coercion from police.\n\nOn May 6, 1993 (before the victims were found later the same day), Hutcheson took a polygraph exam by Detective Don Bray at the Marion Police Department, to determine whether or not she had stolen money from her West Memphis employer. Hutcheson's young son, Aaron, was also present, and proved such a distraction that Bray was unable to administer the polygraph. Aaron, a playmate of the murdered boys', mentioned to Bray that the boys had been killed at \"the playhouse.\" When the bodies proved to have been discovered near where Aaron indicated, Bray asked Aaron for further details, and Aaron claimed that he had witnessed the murders committed by Satanists who spoke Spanish. Aaron's further statements were wildly inconsistent, and he was unable to identify Baldwin, Echols, or Misskelley from photo line-ups, and there was no \"playhouse\" at the location Aaron indicated. A police officer leaked portions of Aaron's statements to the press contributing to the growing belief that the murders were part of a Satanic rite.\n\nOn or about June 1, 1993, Hutcheson agreed to police suggestions to place hidden microphones in her home during an encounter with Echols. Misskelley agreed to introduce Hutcheson to Echols. During their conversation, Hutcheson reported that Echols made no incriminating statements. Police said the recording was \"inaudible\", but Hutcheson claimed the recording was audible. On June 2, 1993, Hutcheson told police that about two weeks after the murders were committed, she, Echols, and Misskelley attended a Wiccan meeting in Turrell, Arkansas. Hutcheson claimed that, at the Wiccan meeting, a drunken Echols openly bragged about killing the three boys. Misskelley was first questioned on June 3, 1993, a day after Hutcheson's purported confession. Hutcheson was unable to recall the Wiccan meeting location and did not name any other participants in the purported meeting. Hutcheson was never charged with theft. She claimed she had implicated Echols and Misskelley to avoid facing criminal charges, and to obtain a reward for the discovery of the murderers.\n\nMisskelley was tried separately, and Echols and Baldwin were tried together in 1994. Under the \"Bruton rule\", Misskelley's confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants; thus he was tried separately. All three defendants pleaded not guilty.\n\nDuring Misskelley's trial, Dr. Richard Ofshe, an expert on false confessions and police coercion, and Professor of Sociology at UC Berkeley, testified that the brief recording of Misskelley's interrogation was a \"classic example\" of police coercion. Critics have also stated that Misskelley's various \"confessions\" were in many respects inconsistent with each other, as well as with the particulars of the crime scene and murder victims, including (for example) an \"admission\" that Misskelley \"watched Damien rape one of the boys.\" Police had initially suspected that the victims had been raped because their anuses were dilated. However, there was no forensic evidence indicating that the murdered boys had been raped. Dilation of the anus is a normal post-mortem condition.\n\nOn February 5, 1994, Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed, but the Arkansas Supreme Court affirmed the conviction.\n\nThree weeks later, Echols and Baldwin went on trial. The prosecution accused the three young men of committing a Satanic murder. The prosecution called Dale W. Griffis, a graduate of Columbia Pacific University, as an expert in the occult to testify the murders were a Satanic ritual. On March 19, 1994 Echols and Baldwin were found guilty on three counts of murder. The court sentenced Echols to death and Baldwin to life in prison.\n\nAt trial, the defense team argued that news articles from the time could have been the source for Echols' knowledge about the genital mutilation, and Echols said his knowledge was limited to what was \"on TV\".\n\nThe prosecution claimed that Echols' knowledge was nonetheless too close to the facts, since there was no public reporting of drowning or that one victim had been mutilated more than the others. Echols testified that Detective Ridge's description of their earlier conversation (which was not recorded) regarding those particular details was inaccurate (and indeed that some other claims by Ridge were \"lies\"). Mara Leveritt, an investigative journalist and the author of \"Devil's Knot\", argues that Echols' information may have come from police leaks, such as Detective Gitchell's comments to Mark Byers, that circulated amongst the local public. The defense team objected when the prosecution attempted to question Echols about his past violent behaviors, but the defense objections were overruled.\n\nThere has been widespread criticism of how the police handled the crime scene. Misskelley's former attorney Dan Stidham cites multiple substantial police errors at the crime scene, characterizing it as \"literally trampled, especially the creek bed.\" The bodies, he said, had been removed from the water before the coroner arrived to examine the scene and determine the state of rigor mortis, allowing the bodies to decay on the creek bank and to be exposed to sunlight and insects. The police did not telephone the coroner until almost two hours after the discovery of the floating shoe, resulting in a late appearance by the coroner. Officials failed to drain the creek in a timely manner and secure possible evidence in the water (the creek was sandbagged after the bodies were pulled from the water).\n\nMoreover, Stidham calls the coroner's investigation \"extremely substandard.\" There was a small amount of blood found at the scene that was never tested. According to HBO's documentaries \"\" (1996) and \"\" (2000), no blood was found at the crime scene, indicating that the location where the bodies were found was not necessarily the location where the murders actually happened. After the initial investigation, the police failed to control disclosure of information and speculation about the crime scene.\n\nAccording to Leveritt, \"Police records were a mess. To call them disorderly would be putting it mildly.\" Leveritt speculated that the small local police force was overwhelmed by the crime, which was unlike any they had ever investigated. Police refused an unsolicited offer of aid and consultation from the violent crimes experts of the Arkansas State Police, and critics suggested this was due to the WMPD's being under investigation by the Arkansas State Police for suspected theft from the Crittenden County drug task force. Leveritt further noted that some of the physical evidence was stored in paper sacks obtained from a supermarket (with the supermarket's name printed on the bags) rather than in containers of known and controlled origin.\n\nWhen police speculated about the assailant, the juvenile probation officer assisting at the scene of the murders speculated that Echols was \"capable\" of committing the murders,\" stating: \"it looks like Damien Echols finally killed someone.\"\n\nBrent Turvey, a forensic scientist and criminal profiler, stated in the film \"Paradise Lost 2\" that human bite marks could have been left on at least one of the victims. However, these potential bite marks were first noticed in photographs years after the trials and were not inspected by a board-certified medical examiner until four years after the murders. The defense's expert testified that the mark in question was not an adult bite mark, while experts put on by the State concluded that there was no bite mark at all. The State's experts had examined the actual bodies for any marks, and others conducted expert photo analysis of injuries. Upon further examination, it was concluded that if the marks were bite marks, they did not match the teeth of any of the three convicted.\n\nIn May 1994, the three defendants appealed their convictions; the convictions were upheld on direct appeal.\n\nIn 2007, Echols petitioned for a retrial, based on a statute permitting post-conviction testing of DNA evidence due to technological advances made since 1994 which might provide exoneration for the wrongfully convicted. However, the original trial judge, Judge David Burnett, disallowed presentation of this information in his court. This ruling was in turn thrown out by the Arkansas Supreme Court as to all three defendants on November 4, 2010.\n\nJohn Mark Byers, the adoptive father of victim Christopher Byers, gave a knife to cameraman Doug Cooper, who was working with documentary makers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky while filming the first \"\" feature. The knife was a folding hunting knife manufactured by Kershaw. According to the statements given by Berlinger and Sinofsky, Cooper informed them of his receipt of the knife on December 19, 1993. After the documentary crew returned to New York, Berlinger and Sinofsky were reported to have discovered what appeared to be blood on the knife. HBO executives ordered them to return the knife to the West Memphis Police Department. The knife was not received at the West Memphis Police Department until January 8, 1994.\n\nByers initially claimed the knife had never been used. However, after blood was found on the knife, Byers stated that he had used it only once, to cut deer meat. When told the blood matched both his and Chris' blood type, Byers said he had no idea how that blood might have gotten on the knife. During interrogation, West Memphis police suggested to Byers that he might have left the knife out accidentally, and Byers agreed with this. Byers later stated that he may have cut his thumb. Further testing of the knife produced inconclusive results about the source of the blood. Uncertainty remained due to the small amount of blood and because both John Mark Byers and Chris Byers had the same HLA-DQα genotype.\n\nByers agreed to and passed a polygraph test about the murders during the filming of \"Paradise Lost 2: Revelations\", but the documentary indicated that Byers was under the influence of several psychoactive prescription medications that could have affected the test results.\n\nFollowing their convictions, Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin submitted imprints of their teeth. These were compared to the alleged bite marks on Stevie Branch's forehead that had not been mentioned in the original autopsy or trial. No matches were found. John Mark Byers had his teeth removed in 1997, after the first trial but before an imprint could be made. His stated reasons for the removal are apparently contradictory. He has claimed both that the seizure medication he was taking caused periodontal disease, and that he planned the removal because of other kinds of dental problems which had troubled him for years.\n\nAfter an expert examined autopsy photos and noted what he thought might be the imprint of a belt buckle on Byers' corpse, the elder Byers revealed to the police that he had spanked his stepson shortly before the boy disappeared.\n\nIn October 2003, Vicki Hutcheson, who had played a part in the arrests of Misskelley, Echols, and Baldwin, gave an interview to the \"Arkansas Times\" in which she stated that every word she had given to the police was a fabrication. She further asserted that the police had implied that if she did not cooperate with them they would take away her child. She said that when she visited the police station, employees had photographs of Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley on the wall and were using them as dart targets. She also claims that an audiotape the police said was \"unintelligible\" (and that they eventually lost) was perfectly clear and contained no incriminating statements.\nIn 2007, DNA collected from the crime scene was tested. None was found to match DNA from Echols, Baldwin, or Misskelley. A hair \"not inconsistent with\" Stevie Branch's stepfather, Terry Hobbs, was found tied into the knots used to bind one of the victims. The prosecutors, while conceding that no DNA evidence tied the accused to the crime scene, said: \"The State stands behind its convictions of Echols and his codefendants.\" Pamela Hobbs' May 5, 2009 declaration in the United States District Court, Eastern District of Arkansas, Western Division indicates that \"one hair was consistent with the hair of [Terry's] friend, David Jacoby\" (Point 16), and:\n\"17. Additionally, after the Murders my sister Jo Lynn McCauhey and I found in Terry's nightstand a knife that Stevie carried with him constantly and which I had believed was with him when he died. It was a pocket knife that my father had given to Stevie, and Stevie loved that knife. I had been shocked that the police did not find it with Stevie when they found his body. I had always assumed that my son's murderer had taken the knife during the crime. I could not believe it was in Terry's things. He had never told me that he had it.\n\n18. Also, my sister Jo Lynn told me that she saw Terry wash clothes, bed linens and curtains from Stevie's room at an odd time around the time of the Murders.\n\n19. There was additional new evidence discovered in 2007 that I cannot now recall.\"\n\nIn July 2008, it was revealed that Kent Arnold, the jury foreman on the Echols-Baldwin trial, had discussed the case with an attorney prior to the beginning of deliberations. Arnold was accused of advocating for the guilt of the West Memphis Three and sharing knowledge of inadmissible evidence, like the Jessie Misskelley statements, with other jurors. At the time, legal experts agreed that this issue could result in the reversal of the convictions of Jason Baldwin and Damien Echols.\n\nIn September 2008, attorney (now judge) Daniel Stidham, who represented Misskelley in 1994, testified at a postconviction relief hearing. Stidham testified under oath that during the trial, Judge David Burnett erred by making an improper communication with the jury during its deliberations. Stidham overheard Judge Burnett discuss taking a lunch break with the jury foreman and heard the foreman reply that the jury was almost finished. He testified Judge Burnett responded, \"You'll need food for when you come back for sentencing,\" and that the foreman asked in return what would happen if the defendant was acquitted. Stidham said the judge closed the door without answering. He testified that his own failure to put this incident on the court record and his failure to meet the minimum requirements in state law to represent a defendant in a capital murder case was evidence of ineffective assistance of counsel and that Misskelley's conviction should therefore be vacated.\n\nOn October 29, 2007, papers were filed in federal court by Echols's defense lawyers seeking a retrial or his immediate release from prison. The filing cited DNA evidence linking Terry Hobbs (stepfather of one of the victims) to the crime scene, and new statements from Hobbs' now ex-wife. Also presented in the filing was new expert testimony that the supposed knife marks on the victims, including the injuries to Byers' genitals, were in fact the result of animal predation after the bodies had been dumped.\n\nOn September 10, 2008, Circuit Court Judge David Burnett denied the request for a retrial, citing the DNA tests as inconclusive. That ruling was appealed to the Arkansas Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in the case on September 30, 2010.\n\nOn November 4, 2010, the Arkansas Supreme Court ordered a lower judge to consider whether newly analyzed DNA evidence might exonerate the three. The justices also instructed the lower court to examine claims of misconduct by the jurors who sentenced Damien Echols to death and Jessie Misskelley and Jason Baldwin to life in prison.\n\nIn early December 2010, David Burnett was elected to the Arkansas State Senate. Circuit Court Judge David Laser was selected to replace David Burnett and preside in the evidentiary hearings mandated by the successful appeal.\n\nAfter weeks of negotiations, on August 19, 2011, Echols, Baldwin and Misskelley were released from prison as part of a plea deal, making the hearings ordered by the Arkansas Supreme Court unnecessary. The three entered into unusual Alford plea deals. The Alford plea is a legal mechanism that allows defendants to plead guilty while still asserting their actual innocence, in cases where defendants concede that prosecutors have sufficient evidence to secure a conviction. Stephen Braga, an attorney with Ropes & Gray who took up Echols's defense on a pro bono basis beginning in 2009, negotiated the plea agreement with prosecutors.\n\nUnder the deal, Judge David Laser vacated the previous convictions, including the capital murder convictions for Echols and Baldwin, and ordered a new trial. Each man then entered an Alford plea to lesser charges of first- and second-degree murder while verbally stating their innocence. Judge Laser then sentenced them to time served, a total of 18 years and 78 days, and they were each given a suspended imposition of sentence for 10 years. If they re-offend they can be sent back to prison for 21 years.\n\nFactors cited by prosecutor Scott Ellington for agreeing to the plea deal included that two of the victims' families had joined the cause of the defense, that the mother of a witness who testified about Echols's confession had questioned her daughter's truthfulness, and that the State Crime Lab employee who collected fiber evidence at the Echols and Baldwin homes after their arrests had died. As part of the plea deal, the three men cannot pursue civil action against the state for wrongful imprisonment.\n\nMany of the men's supporters, and opponents who still believe them guilty, were unhappy with the unusual plea deal. In 2011, supporters pushed Arkansas Governor Mike Beebe to pardon Echols, Baldwin, and Misskelley based on their innocence. Beebe said he would deny the request unless there was evidence showing someone else committed the murders. Prosecutor Scott Ellington said the Arkansas state crime laboratory would help seek other suspects by running searches on any DNA evidence produced in private laboratory tests during the defense team's investigation. This would include running the results through the FBI's Combined DNA Index System database. Ellington said that, although he still considered the men guilty, the three would likely be acquitted if a new trial were held because of the powerful legal counsel representing them now, the loss of evidence over time, and the change of heart among some of the witnesses.\n\nThe families of the three victims are divided in their opinions as to the guilt or innocence of the West Memphis Three. In 2000, the biological father of Christopher Byers, Rick Murray, expressed his doubts about the guilty verdicts on the West Memphis Three website. In 2007, Pamela Hobbs, the mother of victim Stevie Branch, joined those who have publicly questioned the verdicts, calling for a reopening of the verdicts and further investigation of the evidence. In late 2007, John Mark Byers–who was previously vehement in his belief that Echols, Misskelley, and Baldwin were guilty–also announced that he now believes that they are innocent. \"I had made the comment if it were ever proven the three were innocent, I'd be the first to lead the charge for their freedom,\" said Byers, and take \"every opportunity that I have to voice that the West Memphis Three are innocent and the evidence and proof prove they're innocent.\" Byers has spoken to the media on behalf of the convicted, and has expressed his desire for justice for the families of both the victims and the three accused.\n\nIn 2010, district Judge Brian S. Miller ordered Terry Hobbs, the stepfather of victim Stevie Branch, to pay $17,590 to Dixie Chicks singer Natalie Maines for legal costs stemming from a defamation lawsuit he filed against the band. Miller dismissed a suit Hobbs filed over Maines' remarks and writings implying that he was involved in killing his stepson. The judge said Hobbs had chosen to involve himself in public discussion over whether the convictions were just.\n\nJohn E. Douglas, a former longtime FBI agent and current criminal profiler, said that the murders were more indicative of a single murderer intent on degrading and punishing the victims, than of a trio of \"unsophisticated\" teenagers. Douglas believed that the perpetrator had a violent history and was familiar with the victims and with local geography. Douglas was formerly FBI Unit Chief for 25 years of the Investigative Support Unit of the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime. He stated in his report for Echols's legal team that there was no evidence the murders were linked to satanic rituals and that post-mortem animal predation could explain the alleged knife injuries. He said that the victims had died from a combination of blunt force trauma and drowning, in a crime which he believed was driven by personal cause.\n\nThree films, \"\", \"\", and \"\", directed by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, have documented this case and are strongly critical of the verdict. The films marked the first time Metallica allowed their music to be used in a movie, which drew attention to the case.\n\nThere have been a number of books, including \"Blood of Innocents\" by Guy Reel, \"The Last Pentacle of the Sun: Writings in Support of the West Memphis Three\", edited by Brett Alexander Savory & M. W. Anderson, featuring dark fiction and non-fiction by well-known speculative fiction writers, and \"Devil's Knot\" by Mara Leveritt, which also argue that the suspects were wrongly convicted. In 2005, Damien Echols completed his memoir, \"Almost Home, Vol 1\", offering his perspective of the case. A biography of John Mark Byers by Greg Day was published in May 2012.\n\nMany songs were written about the case, and two albums released in support of the defendants. In 2000, The album \"Free the West Memphis 3\" was released by KOCH Records. Organized by Eddie Spaghetti of the band Supersuckers, the album featured a number of original songs about the case and other recordings by artists such as Steve Earle, Tom Waits, L7, and Joe Strummer. In 2002, Henry Rollins worked with other vocalists from various rock, hip hop, punk and metal groups and members of Black Flag and the Rollins Band on the compilation album \"\". All money raised from sales of the album are donated to the legal funds of the West Memphis Three. Metalcore band Zao's 2002 album \"Parade of Chaos\" included a track inspired by the case named \"Free The Three\". On April 28, 2011, the band Disturbed released a song entitled \"3\" as a download on their website. The song is about the West Memphis Three, with 100% of the proceeds going to their benefit foundation for their release.\n\nA website by Martin David Hill, containing approximately 160,000 words and intending to be a \"thorough investigation\", collates and discusses many details surrounding the murders and investigation, including some anecdotal information.\n\nInvestigative journalist Aphrodite Jones undertook an exploration of the case on her Discovery Network show \"True Crime With Aphrodite Jones\" following the DNA discoveries. The episode premiered May 5, 2011, with extensive background information included on the show's page at the Investigation Discovery site. In August 2011, White Light Productions announced that the West Memphis Three would be featured on their new program \"Wrongfully Convicted\".\n\nIn January 2010, the CBS television news journal \"48 Hours\" aired \"The Memphis 3\", an in-depth coverage of the history of the case including interviews with Echols and supporters. On September 17, 2011, \"48 Hours\" re-aired the episode with the update of their release and interviews from Echols and his wife, and Baldwin. \"Piers Morgan Tonight\" aired an episode on September 29, 2011, about the three's plans for the future and continued investigations on the case.\n\n\"West of Memphis\", directed and written by Amy J. Berg, and produced by Peter Jackson, as well as by Echols himself, premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival. Actor Johnny Depp, a longtime supporter of the West Memphis Three and personal friend of Damien Echols, was on hand to support the film in its premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2012.\n\nAtom Egoyan directed a dramatized feature film of the case, titled \"Devil's Knot\", released in U.S. theaters on May 9, 2014. The film stars Reese Witherspoon and Colin Firth.\n\nJessie Misskelley Jr. (born July 10, 1975) was arrested in connection to the murders of May 5, 1993. After a reported 12 hours of interrogation by police, Misskelley, who has an IQ of 72, confessed to the murders, and implicated Baldwin and Echols. However, the confession was at odds with facts known by police, such as the time of the murders. Under the \"\"Bruton\" rule\", his confession could not be admitted against his co-defendants and thus he was tried separately. Misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder. The court sentenced him to life plus 40 years in prison. His conviction was appealed and affirmed by the Arkansas Supreme Court.\n\nOn August 19, 2011, Misskelley, along with Baldwin and Echols, entered an Alford plea. Judge David Laser then sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. All three were released from prison that same day. Since his release, Misskelley has become engaged to his high school girlfriend and enrolled in a community college to train as an auto mechanic.\n\nCharles Jason Baldwin (born April 11, 1977) along with Misskelley and Echols, entered an Alford plea on August 19, 2011. Baldwin pleaded guilty to three counts of first degree murder while still asserting his actual innocence. The judge then sentenced the three men to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and also levied a suspended sentence of 10 years.\n\nBaldwin was initially resistant to agree to this deal, insisting as a matter of principle that he would not plead guilty to something he did not do. But, he said, his refusal would have meant that Echols stayed on death row. \"This was not justice,\" he said of the deal. \"However, they're trying to kill Damien.\" Since his release, Baldwin has moved to Seattle to live with friends. He is in a relationship with a woman who befriended him while he was in prison. He has stated that he plans on enrolling in college to become a lawyer in order to help wrongfully convicted persons prove their innocence. Baldwin said in a 2011 interview with Piers Morgan that he worked for a construction company and he was learning how to drive.\n\nDamien Wayne Echols (born Michael Wayne Hutchison, December 11, 1974) was on death row, locked-down 23 hours per day at the Varner Unit Supermax. On August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, was released from prison after their attorneys and the judge handling the upcoming retrial agreed to a deal. Under the terms of the Alford guilty plea, Echols and his co-defendants accepted the sufficiency of evidence supporting the three counts of first degree murder while maintaining their innocence. DNA evidence at the scene was not found to include any from Echols or his co-defendants. \n\nEchols, ADC# 000931, entered the system on March 19, 1994. Until August 2011, he was incarcerated in the Arkansas Department of Correction (ADC) Varner Unit Supermax. In prison in 1999, he married landscape architect Lorri Davis. He moved to New York City after his release.\n\nEchols' mental stability during the years immediately prior to the murders and during his trial was the focus of his appellate legal team in their appeal attempts. In his efforts to win a new trial, Echols, 27 at the time of the appeal, claimed he was incompetent to stand trial because of a history of mental illness. The record on appeal spells out a long history of Echols' mental health problems, including a May 5, 1992, Arkansas Department of Youth Services referral for possible mental illness, a year to the day before the murders. Hospital records for his treatment in Little Rock 11 months before the killings show a history of self-mutilation and assertions to hospital staff that he gained power by drinking blood, that he had inside him the spirit of a woman who had killed her husband, and that he was having hallucinations. He also told mental health workers that he was \"going to influence the world.\"\n\nThe appellate legal team argued that Echols did not waive his assertion that he was not mentally competent before his 1994 trial because he was not competent to waive it. To assist in the appeals process, Echols' appellate legal team retained a Berkeley, California-based forensic psychiatrist, Dr. George Woods, to make their case.\n\nEchols' lawyers claimed that his condition worsened during the trial, when he developed a \"psychotic euphoria that caused him to believe he would evolve into a superior entity\" and eventually be transported to a different world. His psychosis dominated his perceptions of everything going on in court, Woods wrote. Echols's mental state while in prison awaiting trial was also called into question by his appellate team.\nWhile in prison, Echols wrote letters to Gloria Shettles, an investigator for his defense team. Echols sought to overturn his conviction based on trial error, including juror misconduct, as well as the results of a DNA Status Report filed on July 17, 2007, which concluded \"none of the genetic material recovered at the scene of the crimes was attributable to Mr. Echols, Echols' co-defendant, Jason Baldwin, or defendant Jessie Misskelley ... Although most of the genetic material recovered from the scene was attributable to the victims of the offenses, some of it cannot be attributed to either the victims or the defendants.\" Advanced DNA and other scientific evidence – combined with additional evidence from several different witnesses and experts – released in October 2007 had cast strong doubts on the original convictions. A hearing on Echols' petition for a writ of habeas corpus was held in the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas.\n\nOn August 19, 2011, Echols, along with Baldwin and Misskelley, entered an Alford plea, while asserting their innocence. The judge sentenced them to 18 years and 78 days, the amount of time they had served, and levied a suspended sentence of 10 years. Echols' sentence was reduced to three counts of first degree murder. Lawyers representing the West Memphis Three reached the plea deal that allowed the men to be released from prison. They were transferred to the hearing with their possessions. The plea deal did not technically result in a full exoneration; some of the convictions would stand, but the men would not admit guilt. The counsel representing the men said they would continue to pursue full exoneration.\n\nEchols relocated to Salem, Massachusetts with his wife and has no intentions of returning to Arkansas. In an interview with Piers Morgan, he said that he would like to have a career in writing and visual arts.\n\nEchols self-published the memoir, \"Almost Home: My Life Story Vol. 1\" (2005), while still in prison. After his release, he has worked on a number of additional media projects.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8833", "title": "Donald Dewar", "text": "Donald Dewar\n\nDonald Campbell Dewar (21 August 1937 – 11 October 2000) was a Scottish politician, the inaugural First Minister of Scotland and an advocate of Scottish devolution.\n\nDewar first entered politics as the Labour Member of Parliament (MP) for Aberdeen South following the 1966 general election. After losing his seat in 1970, he served in the House of Commons again from 1978 until his death in 2000. He served as Secretary of State for Scotland in British Prime Minister Tony Blair's Cabinet from 1997 to 1999, successfully campaigning for a Scottish Parliament in the 1997 Scottish devolution referendum.\n\nHaving led the Labour campaign in the run up to the first Scottish Parliament election, he subsequently became the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland on 6 May 1999, and was appointed Leader of the Scottish Labour Party a day later and became the first Scottish First Minister as the head of a devolved coalition government with the Liberal Democrats.\n\nHe died of a brain hemorrhage while in office, and was succeeded as First Minister and Scottish Labour leader by Henry McLeish.\n\nDewar was born in Glasgow on 21 August 1937 as the only child of Alisdair (1897–1973) and Mary Dewar (née Bennett). His father was a dermatologist and a former general practitioner. Both Dewar's parents had ill health during his childhood; his father contracted tuberculosis and his mother suffered from a benign brain tumour when Donald was young.\n\nHe attended the Glasgow Academy, and was admitted to the University of Glasgow in 1957, where he gained a MA degree in History in 1961, a second-class LLB degree in 1964, and was an editor of the \"Glasgow University Guardian\".\n\nDewar met several future politicians at the university Dialectic Society, including John Smith (who would later become leader of the Labour Party), Sir Menzies Campbell (who would later become leader of the Liberal Democrats) and Derry Irvine (who would serve as Lord Chancellor in the same cabinet as Dewar). At university, he also served as chair of the Glasgow University Labour Club and president of the Glasgow University Union.\n\nOn 20 July 1964, Dewar married Alison Mary McNair, with whom he had two children: a daughter, Marion, and a son, Ian. In 1972, McNair separated from Dewar and entered a relationship with the Scottish lawyer Derry Irvine. Dewar and his wife divorced in 1973, and he never remarried.\n\nHe worked as a solicitor in Glasgow after graduating from university, and was also a member of the Labour Party, and soon turned his sights towards being elected to parliament. In 1962, he was selected as the Labour candidate for the Aberdeen South constituency. In the 1964 general election, he failed to win the seat, but won it at the 1966 general election at the age of 28—defeating Priscilla Tweedsmuir by 1,799 votes.\n\nIn his maiden speech to the House of Commons in the same year, Dewar spoke against a proposed increase on potato tax. His speech became his first political success: as the tax was repealed the following year in 1967. Also in 1967, Dewar was made a Parliamentary Private Secretary to the Education Secretary Anthony Crosland, with whom Dewar later confessed to having never establishing a rapport—saying Crosland was a \"very odd man\".\n\nDewar remained in that position at the Department of Education until 1969, in which year Dewar opposed a visit to Aberdeen by the Springbok rugby team and staged a silent vigil near the team's ground. In April 1968, he was proposed for a Minister of State position by Roy Jenkins, but was not appointed. Dewar lost his constituency seat to the Conservative candidate Iain Sproat at the 1970 general election by over 1,000 votes.\n\nDewar spent much of the 1970s looking for another parliamentary seat. He hosted a Friday evening talk show on Radio Clyde, and in June 1971 was beaten by Dennis Canavan when he applied for the seat of West Stirlingshire. He worked as a solicitor for much of that decade and became a reporter on children's panels and was involved with the Lanarkshire local authority. Dewar became a partner in Ross Harper Murphy, in 1975.\n\nIn September 2009, Dennis Canavan said Dewar reacted callously when his son was diagnosed with skin cancer in 1989. The disease eventually killed him. Canavan said Dewar remarked, \"Oh no! That's all we need. He was mad enough before but I shudder to think what he'll be like now.\"\n\nDonald Dewar was selected for the seat Glasgow Garscadden by a majority of three, after Dewar's friend in the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers MP Willie Small died unexpectedly. He was returned to parliament at a by-election on 13 April 1978, a crucial victory which was seen as halting the rise of the Scottish National Party. In Scotland's first referendum on devolution, held in March 1979, he campaigned for a \"Yes\" vote alongside the Conservative Alick Buchanan-Smith and the Liberal Russell Johnston. Though they won a narrow majority, it fell short of the 40% required, contributing to the downfall of the Callaghan Government, in May 1979.\n\nDewar gained a parliamentary platform as chairman of the Scottish Affairs Select Committee. After a year honing his inquisitorial skills, he joined the front bench in November 1980 as a Scottish affairs spokesman when Michael Foot became party leader. In 1981, as the Labour Party divided itself further due to internal disagreement, Dewar was almost deselected in his constituency by hard left activists, but he successfully defended himself against this threat.\n\nHe rose quickly through the ranks, becoming Shadow Scottish Secretary in November 1983. On 21 December 1988, Dewar was in Lockerbie after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, as the member of the Shadow Cabinet in charge of Scottish affairs. In 1992, John Smith made him Shadow Social Security Secretary and three years later, Dewar was made a Chief Whip for the Labour Party by Tony Blair.\n\nAt the 1997 general election, he became MP for Glasgow Anniesland, which was mostly the same constituency with minor boundary changes. Labour won this election by a landslide, and Dewar was given the post of Secretary of State for Scotland. He was able to start the devolution process he dreamt of years earlier, and worked tirelessly on creating the Scotland Act, popularly referred to as \"Smith's unfinished business\". When ratified, this was to give Scotland its first Parliament for nearly 300 years.\n\nIn January 1998, he confirmed that he would stand for a seat in the Scottish Parliament. The first elections to the Scottish Parliament were held on 6 May 1999, with Dewar leading the Scottish Labour Party against their main opponents, the Scottish National Party led by Alex Salmond.\n\nHe was elected as the Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for Glasgow Anniesland, having the unusual distinction of being both an MP and MSP for the same constituency. Although Scottish Labour won more seats than any other party, they did not have a majority in Parliament to allow them to form an Executive without the help of a smaller party. A deal was agreed with the Scottish Liberal Democrats to form a coalition, with Dewar agreeing to their demand for the abolition of up front tuition fees for university students.\n\nOn 13 May 1999, Dewar was nominated as First Minister, and was officially appointed by the Queen on 17 May at a ceremony in the Palace of Holyroodhouse. He later travelled to the Court of Session to be sworn in by the Lord President and receive the Great Seal of Scotland.\n\nOn 16 June, Dewar set out the legislative programme for the Executive which included: an Education bill to improve standards in Scottish schools; land reform to give right of access to the countryside, a bill to abolish the feudal system of land tenure; and a bill to establish National Parks in Scotland.\n\nIn April 2000, Dewar was admitted to hospital for tests on his heart, following a previous test where a minor irregularity was discovered. In May 2000, he had surgery to repair a leaking heart valve, and was forced to take a three-month break from Parliament, with Deputy First Minister Jim Wallace taking over as Acting First Minister. He returned to work on 14 August 2000.\n\nDewar dealt with the 2000 Exam Results Fiasco and the Lorry Drivers' Strike, and attended the Labour Party conference in Brighton in September, but at the end of September, he told the historian Tom Devine in Dublin that if there was no surge of the energy of old, he would have to reappraise the situation within a few months.\n\nOn 10 October 2000, around lunchtime, Dewar sustained a fall. He seemed fine at first, but later that day suffered a massive brain haemorrhage which was possibly triggered by the anticoagulant medication he was taking following heart surgery. He died the following day, in Edinburgh's Western General Hospital, never having regained consciousness. He was 63 years old.\n\nDewar's funeral service was held at Glasgow Cathedral, amid scenes of mourning unknown for a politician in Scotland's largest city. He was cremated on 18 October 2000, and his ashes were scattered at Lochgilphead in Argyll.\n\n\"Although he has become something of a political legend, Donald would have abhorred any attempt to turn him into some kind of secular saint. He would have been horrified at a Diana-style out-pouring of synthetic grief at his untimely death.\" — Iain MacWhirter, \"Sunday Herald\", 15 October 2000.\n\nOne of the first scandals to hit the new Scottish Parliament occurred when allegations that the lobbying arm of public relations company Beattie Media had privileged access to ministers were published, prompting Dewar to ask the standards committee to investigate the reports. The Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, was called to appear before the standards committee during the investigation although he was later cleared of any wrongdoing and the committee declared there was no evidence he had been influenced from lobbying by Beattie Media.\n\nDewar also threatened to sack any minister or aide who briefed the media against another member of the Scottish Executive, following public rows between Jack McConnell and the Minister of Health and Community Care, Susan Deacon over the budget allocated to health .\n\nDewar, a centre left politician representing one of Glasgow's peripheral housing estates with high levels of poverty, amassed a personal fortune well in excess of £2,000,000 including public utility shares, antiques and artwork with a value of over £400,000.\n\nDewar's work for the Scottish Parliament has led him to be called the \"Father of the Nation\".\n\nIn May 2002, then Prime Minister Tony Blair unveiled a statue of Donald Dewar at the top of Glasgow's Buchanan Street, a street in Glasgow City centre. In keeping with his famous unkempt appearance, it showed Dewar wearing a slightly crushed jacket.\n\nThe statue was taken down in October 2005 to be cleaned, and was re erected on high plinth in December in an effort to protect it from vandalism. On the base of the statue were inscribed the opening words of the Scotland Act: \"There Shall Be A Scottish Parliament\", a phrase to which Dewar himself famously said, \"I like that!\"\n\nDewar called the Royal High School on Calton Hill in Edinburgh a \"nationalist shibboleth\", mainly because it had been the proposed site of the Scottish Assembly in the 1979 referendum. Dewar's opposition to the Calton Hill site partly contributed to the selection of the Holyrood site, which proved expensive.\n\nThe First ScotRail Class 334 train \"334001\" was named \"Donald Dewar\" in his memory. The \"Dewar Arts Award\" was created by the Scottish Executive in 2002 dedicated to his memory. This award supports talented young Scottish artists.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8835", "title": "Digimon", "text": "Digimon\n\nDigimon ( \"Dejimon\", branded as Digimon: Digital Monsters, stylized as DIGIMON), short for \"Digital Monsters\" ( \"Dejitaru Monsutā\"), is a Japanese media franchise encompassing virtual pet toys, anime, manga, video games, films and a trading card game. The franchise focuses on Digimon creatures, which are monsters living in a \"Digital World\", a parallel universe that originated from Earth's various communication networks. In many incarnations, Digimon are raised by humans called \"Digidestined\" or \"Tamers\" (\"Chosen Children\" in the Japanese version), and they team up to defeat evil Digimon and human villains who are trying to destroy the fabric of the Digital world.\n\nThe franchise was first created in 1997 as a series of virtual pets, akin to—and influenced in style by—the contemporary Tamagotchi or nano Giga Pet toys. The creatures were first designed to look cute and iconic even on the devices' small screens; later developments had them created with a harder-edged style influenced by American comics. The franchise gained momentum with its first anime incarnation, \"Digimon Adventure\", and an early video game, \"Digimon World\", both released in 1999. Several seasons of the anime and films based on them have aired, and the video game series has expanded into genres such as role-playing, racing, fighting, and MMORPGs. Other media forms have also been released.\n\nIn the year 1996 came the Tamagotchi, created by Akihiro Yokoi, Aki Maita and Takeichi Hongo, which was one of the inspirations for the first release of the franchise, a device marketed in June 1997 with the name Digimon, a short for \"Digital Monster\". Aiming at the male audience and created by Akiyoshi Hongo (a pseudonym that refers to the creators of \"Tamagotchi\"), this device shows to players a virtual pet composed entirely of data and designed to play and fight. In February 1998, the \"DigiMon\" fighting game, compatible with Windows 95 and developed by Rapture Technologies, Inc., was announced. The one-shot manga \"C'mon Digimon\", designed by Tenya Yabuno, was published in the Japanese magazine V-Jump by Shueisha in 1997.\n\nA second generation of \"virtual pets\" was marketed six months after the launch of the first, followed by a third in 1998. Each player starts with a baby-level digital creature that has a limited number of attacks and transformations and to make the creature stronger by training and nourishing the creature; when the player is successful in a workout, the Digimon becomes strong, when the player fails, the Digimon becomes weak. Two devices can be connected, allowing two players to battle with their respective creatures, an innovation at the time, however, the battle is only possible from the moment the creature is in the child level or bigger. Playgrounds and subways were where the majority of users of the apparatus were concentrated; The virtual pet was banned in some Asian schools by being considered by parents and teachers as very noisy and violent. The first Digimon were created by Japanese designer Kenji Watanabe, influenced by American comics, which were beginning to gain popularity in Japan, and as such began to make his characters look stronger and \"cool.\" Other types of Digimon, which until the year 2000 totaled 279, came from extensive discussions and collaborations between the Bandai company members.\n\nDigimon hatch from types of eggs which are called . In the English iterations of the franchise there is another type of Digi-Egg that can be used to digivolve, or transform, Digimon. This second type of Digi-Egg is called a in Japanese. (This type of Digi-Egg was also featured as a major object throughout season 2 as a way of Digivolution available only to certain characters at certain points throughout the season.) They age via a process called \"Digivolution\" which changes their appearance and increases their powers. The effect of Digivolution, however, is not permanent in the partner Digimon of the main characters in the anime, and Digimon who have digivolved will most of the time revert to their previous form after a battle or if they are too weak to continue. Some Digimon act feral. Most, however, are capable of intelligence and human speech. They are able to digivolve by the use of Digivices that their human partners have. In some cases, as in the first series, the DigiDestined (known as the 'Chosen Children' in the original Japanese) had to find some special items such as crests and tags so the Digimon could digivolve into further stages of evolution known as \"Ultimate\" and \"Mega\" in the dub.\n\nThe first Digimon anime introduced the Digimon life cycle: They age in a similar fashion to real organisms, but do not die under normal circumstances because they are made of reconfigurable data, which can be seen throughout the show. Any Digimon that receives a fatal wound will dissolve into infinitesimal bits of data. The data then recomposes itself as a Digi-Egg, which will hatch when rubbed gently, and the Digimon goes through its life cycle again. Digimon who are reincarnated in this way will sometimes retain some or all their memories of their previous life. However, if a Digimon's data is completely destroyed, they will die.\n\nDigimon started out as digital pets called \"Digital Monsters\", similar in style and concept to the Tamagotchi. It was planned by WiZ and released by Bandai on June 26, 1997. The toy began as the simple concept of a Tamagotchi mainly for boys. The V-Pet is similar to its predecessors, with the exceptions of being more difficult and being able to fight other Digimon v-pets. Every owner would start with a Baby Digimon, train it, evolve it, take care of it, and then have battles with other Digimon owners to see who was stronger. The Digimon pet had several evolution capabilities and abilities too, so many owners had different Digimon. In December, the second generation of Digital Monster was released, followed by a third edition in 1998.\n\nOn March 6, 1999, the franchise was given an anime as the first of the \"Digimon\" movies aired in theaters in Japan. Originally, the \"Digimon Adventure\" movie was supposed to be a short film, but after the storyboard was finished, a request for \"Digimon\" becoming a children's television show was made. On March 7, 1999, they began airing a television sequel titled \"Digimon Adventure\".\n\nSix more series would follow, most of them with their own tie-in movies, and the series was dubbed for release in western markets in the fall of the same year. The show spawned card games, with \"Hyper Colosseum\" in Japan and later \"Digi-Battle\" in America, and more video games. The animated series is easily the best-known segment of the Digimon universe and responsible for the majority of its popularity.\n\n\"Digimon\" are \"Digital Monsters\". According to the stories, they are inhabitants of the \"DigiWorld\", a manifestation of Earth's communication network. The stories tell of a group of mostly pre-teens, who accompany special Digimon born to defend their world (and ours) from various evil forces. To help them surmount the most difficult obstacles found within both realms, the Digimon have the ability to evolve \"(Digivolve)\" In this process, the Digimon change appearance and become much stronger, often changing in personality as well. The group of children who come in contact with the Digital World changes from series to series.\n\nAs of 2016, there have been seven series – \"Digimon Adventure\", the follow-up sequel \"Digimon Adventure 02\", \"Digimon Tamers\", \"Digimon Frontier\", \"Digimon Data Squad\", \"Digimon Fusion\" and \"Digimon Universe: Appli Monsters\". The first two series take place in the same fictional universe, but the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh each occupy their own unique world. Each series is commonly based on the original storyline but things are added to make them unique. However, in \"Tamers\", the \"Adventure\" universe is referred to as a commercial enterprise – a trading card game in Japan, plus a show-within-a-show in the English dub. It also features an appearance by a character from the \"Adventure\" universe. In addition, each series has spawned assorted feature films. Digimon still shows popularity, as new card series, video games, and movies are still being produced and released: new card series include Eternal Courage, Hybrid Warriors, Generations, and Operation X; the video game, \"Digimon Rumble Arena 2\"; and the previously unreleased movies \"Revenge of Diaboromon\", \"Runaway Locomon\", \"Battle of Adventurers\", and \"Island of Lost Digimon\". In Japan, \"Digital Monster X-Evolution\", the eighth TV movie, was released on January 3, 2005, and on December 23, 2005 at Jump Festa 2006, the fifth series, \"Digimon Savers\" was announced for Japan to begin airing after a three-year hiatus of the show. A sixth television series, \"Digimon Xros Wars\", began airing in 2010, and was followed by a second season, which started on October 2, 2011 as a direct sequel to \"Digimon Xros Wars\".\n\nIn August 2014, it was announced that a new Digimon Series will start airing in 2015. Celebrating the 15 years of the first series, it will be set in the \"Digimon Adventure\" universe, following a 17-year-old Tai and his friends in an all new story. Titled \"Digimon Adventure tri.\", the new project was confirmed to be a series of six films, which started release in November 2015.\n\n\"Digimon\" was produced by Toei Animation and Bandai of Japan. The series were broadcast in Japan by Fuji Television, except for \"Xros Wars\" and \"Appli Monsters\" , which instead aired on TV Asahi and TV Tokyo. The first four series were called \"Digimon: Digital Monsters\" in international markets, while \"Savers\" was released as \"Digimon Data Squad\" and \"Xros Wars\" has been released as \"Digimon Fusion\".\n\nThe first Digimon television series, which began airing on March 7, 1999 in Japan on Fuji TV and Kids Station and on August 14, 1999 in the United States on Fox Kids dubbed by Saban Entertainment for the North American English version. Its premise is a group of seven kids who, while at summer camp, travel to the Digital World, inhabited by creatures known as Digital Monsters, or Digimon, learning they are chosen to be \"DigiDestined\" (\"Chosen Children\" in the Japanese version) to save both the Digital and Real World from evil. Each Kid was given a Digivice which selected them to be transported to the DigiWorld and was destined to be paired up with a Digimon Partner, such as Tai being paired up with Agumon and Matt with Gabumon. The children are helped by a mysterious man/digimon named Gennai, who helps them via hologram. The Digivices help their Digimon allies to Digivolve into stronger creatures in times of peril. The Digimon usually reached higher forms when their human partners are placed in dangerous situations, such as fighting the evil forces of Devimon, Etemon and Myotismon in their Champion forms. Later, each character discovered a crest that each belonged to a person; Tai the Crest of Courage, Matt the Crest of Friendship, Sora the Crest of Love, Izzy the Crest of Knowledge, Mimi the Crest of Sincerity, Joe the Crest of Reliability, T.K. the Crest of Hope, and later Kari the Crest of Light which allowed their Digimon to digivolve into their Ultimate forms. The group consisted of seven original characters: Taichi \"Tai\" Yagami \"Kamiya\", Yamato \"Matt\" Ishida, Sora Takenouchi, Koushiro \"Izzy\" Izumi, Mimi Tachikawa, Joe Kido, and Takeru \"T.K.\" Takaishi. Later on in the series, an eighth character was introduced: Hikari \"Kari\" Yagami \"Kamiya\" (who is Taichi's younger sister).\n\nThe second Digimon series is direct continuation of the first one, and began airing on April 2, 2000. Three years later, with most of the original DigiDestined now in high school at age fourteen, the Digital World was supposedly secure and peaceful. However, a new evil has appeared in the form of the Digimon Emperor (Digimon Kaiser) who as opposed to previous enemies is a human just like the DigiDestined. The Digimon Emperor has been enslaving Digimon with Dark Rings and Control Spires and has somehow made regular Digivolution impossible. However, five set Digi-Eggs with engraved emblems had been appointed to three new DigiDestined along with T.K. and Kari, two of the DigiDestined from the previous series. This new evolutionary process, dubbed Armor Digivolution helps the new DigiDestined to defeat evil lurking in the Digital World. Eventually, the DigiDestined defeat the Digimon Emperor, more commonly known as Ken Ichijouji on Earth, only with the great sacrifice of Ken's own Digimon, Wormmon. Just when things were thought to be settled, new Digimon enemies made from the deactivated Control Spires created by the evil Arukenimon start to appear and cause trouble in the Digital World. To atone for his past mistakes, Ken joins the DigiDestined, being a DigiDestined himself, with his Partner Wormmon revived to fight against them. They soon save countries including France and Australia from control spires and must fight and defeat the evil MaloMyotismon (BelialVamdemon), the digivolved form of Myotismon (Vamdemon) from the previous series. They stop the evil from destroying the two worlds, and at the end, every person on Earth gains their own Digimon partner.\n\nThe third Digimon series, which began airing on April 1, 2001, is set largely in a \"real world\" where the \"Adventure\" and \"Adventure 02\" series are television shows, and where Digimon game merchandise (based on actual items) become key to providing power boosts to real Digimon which appear in that world. The plot revolves around three Tamers, Takato Matsuki, Rika Nonaka, and Henry Wong. It began with Takato creating his own Digimon partner by sliding a mysterious blue card through his card reader, which then became a D-Power. Guilmon takes form from Takato's sketchings of a new Digimon. Together they bond with Rika, Henry, and Takato's friends Kenta, Kazu, and Jeri on a quest to rescue Calumon and defeat the evil force called the D-Reaper, who threatens to take over their world. (\"Tamers\"' only human connection to the \"Adventure\" series is Ryo Akiyama, a character featured in some of the Digimon video games and who made an appearance in some occasions of the \"Adventure\" story-line.) Some of the changes in this series include the way the Digimon digivolve with the introduction of Biomerge-Digivolution and the way their \"Digivices\" work. In this series, the Tamers can slide game cards through their \"Digivices\" and give their Digimon partners certain advantages, as in the card game. This act is called \"Digi-Modify\" (Card Slash in the Japanese version). The same process was often used to Digivolve the Digimon, but as usual, emotions play a big part in the digivolving process. Unlike the two seasons before it and most of the seasons that followed, \"Digimon Tamers\" takes a darker and more realistic approach to its story featuring Digimon who do not reincarnate after their deaths and more complex character development in the original Japanese. The anime has become controversial over the decade, with debates about how appropriate this show actually is for its \"target\" audience, especially due to the Lovecraftian nature of the last arc. The English dub is more lighthearted dialogue-wise, though still not as much as previous series.\n\nThe fourth Digimon series, which began airing on April 7, 2002, radically departs from the previous three by focusing on a new and very different kind of evolution, Spirit Evolution, in which the human characters use their D-Tectors (this series' Digivice) to transform themselves into special Digimon called Legendary Warriors, detracting from the customary formula of having digital partners. After receiving unusual phone messages from Ophanimon (one of the three ruling Digimon alongside Seraphimon and Cherubimon) Takuya Kanbara, Koji Minamoto, Junpei Shibayama, Zoe Orimoto, Tommy Himi, and Koichi Kimura go to a subway station and take a train to the Digital World.\n\nSummoned by Ophanimon, the Digidestined realize that they must find the ten legendary spirits and stop the forces of Cherubimon from physically destroying the Digital World. After finding the ten spirits of the Legendary Warriors and defeating Mercurymon, Grumblemon, Ranamon, and Arbormon, they finally end up fighting Cherubimon hoping to foil his effort to dominate the Digital World. After the defeat of Cherubimon, the Digidestined find they must face an even greater challenge as they try to stop the Royal Knights – Dynasmon and Crusadermon – from destroying the Digital World and using the collected data to revive the original ruler of the Digital World: the tyrannical Lucemon. Ultimately the Digidestined fail in preventing Lucemon from reawakening but they do manage to prevent him from escaping into the Real World. In the final battle, all of the legendary spirits the digidestined have collected thus far merge and create Susanoomon. With this new form, the digidestined are able to effectively defeat Lucemon and save the Digital World. In general, \"Frontier\" has a much lighter tone than that of \"Tamers\", yet remains darker than \"Adventure\" and \"Adventure 02\".\n\nAfter a three-year hiatus, a fifth Digimon series began airing on April 2, 2006. Like \"Frontier\", \"Savers\" has no connection with the previous installments, and also marks a new start for the Digimon franchise, with a drastic change in character designs and story-line, in order to reach a broader audience. The story focuses on the challenges faced by the members of D.A.T.S. (\"Digital Accident Tactics Squad\"), an organization created to conceal the existence of the Digital World and Digimon from the rest of mankind, and secretly solve any Digimon-related incidents occurring on Earth.\n\nLater the D.A.T.S. is dragged into a massive conflict between Earth and the Digital World, triggered by a wicked scientist named Akihiro Kurata, determined to make use of the Digimon for his own personal gains and permanently delete them, along with several opponents the D.A.T.S. must face, like the demonic Belphemon, and the tyrannical King Drasil who threaten to destroy both worlds. The English version was dubbed by Studiopolis and it premiered on the Jetix block on Toon Disney on October 1, 2007. Digivolution in \"Data Squad\" requires the human partner's DNA (\"Digital Natural Ability\" in the English version and \"Digisoul\" in the Japanese version) to activate, a strong empathy with their Digimon, and a will to succeed. \"Digimon Savers\" also introduces a new form of digivolving called Burst Mode which is essentially the level above Mega (previously the strongest form a digimon could take).\n\nLike previously in \"Tamers\", this plot takes on a dark tone throughout the story and the anime was aimed, originally in Japan, at an older audience consisting of late teens and people in their early twenties. Because of that, along with the designs, the anime being heavily edited and localized for western US audiences like past series, and the English dub being aimed mostly toward younger audiences of children aged 6 to 10 and having a lower TV-Y7-FV rating just like past dubs, Studiopolis dubbed the anime on Jetix with far more edits, changes, censorship, and cut footage. This included giving the Japanese characters full Americanized names and American surnames as well as applying far more Americanization (Marcus Damon as opposed to the Japanese Daimon Masaru), cultural streamlining and more edits to their version similar to the changes 4Kids often made (such as removal of Japanese text for the purpose of cultural streamlining). Despite all that, the setting of the country was still in Japan and the characters were Japanese in the dub. This series was the first to show any Japanese cultural concepts that were unfamiliar with American audiences (such as the manju), which were left unedited and used in the English dub. Also despite the heavy censorship and the English dub aimed at young children, some of the Digimon's attacks named after real weapons such as RizeGreymon's Trident Revolver are not edited and used in the English dub.\n\nWell Go USA released it on DVD instead of Disney. The North American English dub was televised on Jetix in the U.S. and on the Family Channel in Canada.\n\nThree and a quarter years after the end of the fifth series, a new sixth series was confirmed by Bandai for the Digimon anime, its official name of the series revealed in the June issue of Shueisha's V Jump magazine being \"Digimon Xros Wars\". It began airing in Japan on TV Asahi from July 6, 2010 onwards. Reverting to the design style of the first four series as well as the plot taking on the younger, lighter tone present in series one, two, and four throughout the story. The story follows a boy named Mikey Kudō (Taiki Kudo in Japan) who, along with his friends, ends up in the Digital World where they meet Shoutmon and his Digimon friends. Wielding a Digivice known as a Fusion Loader (Xros Loader in Japan), Mikey is able to combine multiple Digimon into one to enhance his power, Shoutmon being the usual core of the combination, using a technique known as \"DigiFuse\" (\"Digi-Xros\" in Japan).\n\nForming Team Fusion Fighters (Team Xros Heart in Japan), Mikey, Shoutmon and their friends travel through the Digital World to liberate it from the evil Bagra Army, led by Bagramon (Lord Bagra in English), and Midnight, a shady group led by AxeKnightmon with Nene as a figurehead before joining the Fusion Fighters. The Fusion Fighters also finds themselves at odds with Blue Flare, led by Christopher Aonuma (Kiriha Anouma in Japan).\n\nThe second arc of \"Xros Wars\" was subtitled \"The Evil Death Generals and the Seven Kingdoms\". It saw the main cast reshuffled with a new wardrobe while Angie (Akari in Japan) and Jeremy (Zenjiro in Japan) stay behind in the Human World; thus making Mikey, Christopher and Nene the lead protagonists as they set off to face the Seven Death Generals of the Bagra Army and AxeKnightmon's new pawn: Nene's brother Ewan (Yuu in Japan). A new evolution known as Super Digivolution was introduced at the end of the first arc. The English dub of the series began airing on Nickelodeon on September 7, 2013, which is produced by Saban Brands.\n\nOn August 17, 2011, Shueisha's \"V-Jump\" magazine announced a sequel set one year later, a third arc of \"Xros Wars\" subtitled \"The Young Hunters Who Leapt Through Time\", which aired from October 2, 2011 to March 25, 2012, following on from the previous arc. It focuses on a new protagonist, Tagiru Akashi and his partner Gumdramon who embark on a new journey with an older Mikey, Shoutmon, an older Ewan and the revived Damemon, along with other new comrades as they deal with a hidden dimension that lies between the Human World and the Digital World called DigiQuartz, and a new evil force known as Quartzmon. The series finale reintroduces the heroes of the previous five seasons as they all come together and help the current heroes in the final battle due to the fact that the DigiQuartz is essentially a tear in Space and Time, allowing all of the Digimon universes to converge.\n\n\"Digimon Xros Wars: The Young Hunters Who Leapt Through Time\" was a nominee for the 2012 International Emmy Kids Awards for \"Best Animation\".\n\nA new Digimon series was announced 30 months after the end of \"Digimon Fusion\" at a 15th anniversary concert and theater event for the franchise in August 2014. The series announced the return of the protagonists from the original \"Digimon Adventure\" series, most of them now as high school students. A countdown clicking game was posted on the show's official website, offering news when specific clicks were met. On December 13, 2014 the series title and a key visual featuring character designs by Atsuya Uki were revealed with Keitaro Motonaga announced as director with a tentative premiere date of Spring, 2015. However, on May 6, 2015, it was announced that tri. would not be a television series, but rather a 6-part theatrical film series. The films are being streamed in episodic format outside Japan by Crunchyroll and Hulu from the same day they premiere on Japanese theaters.\n\nThe series is set three years after the events of \"Digimon Adventure 02\", when Digimon who turn rogue by a mysterious infection appear to wreak havoc in the Human World. Tai and the other DigiDestined from the original series reunite with their partners and start fighting back with support from the Japanese government, while Davis, Yolei, Cody, and Ken are defeated by a powerful enemy called Alphamon and disappear without a trace. Tai and the others also meet another DigiDestined called Meiko Mochizuki and her partner Meicoomon who become their friends, until Meicoomon turns hostile as well and flees. After discovering that Meicoomon is the source of the infection, the DigiDestined learn that to prevent the Human and Digital Worlds from being destroyed, the Digital World will be automatically rebooted to stop it, but this event will make their Digimon lose all their memories. After the reboot occurs, and the infection is apparently cleaned, the DigiDestined return to the Digital World and meet their partners in order to restart their bonds with them. When they are attacked by a mysterious man who has used the appearances of Digimon Emperor and Gennai, it is revealed that his master Yggdrasil wanted to create a new world order without humans and Digimon ever interacting with each other. The reboot of Digital World was meant to make the Digimon forget about the existence of humans and restore every Digimon unable to recompose into Digi-Eggs while the infection was meant to destroy humans and conquer the real world. The film series also feature all the DigiDestined's partners Digivolve up to the Mega level, a feat only a few of them had achieved previously.\n\n\nIn May 2016, a new multimedia Digimon project was announced, composed of two video games, a series of toys, and an anime television series titled \"Digimon Universe: Appli Monsters\".\n\nThe story is set in a world where, instead of Digimon, there are \"Appmon\" (shortened for \"Appli Monsters\"), artificially intelligent beings that are born within mobile apps. The main protagonist is Haru Shinkai, who gets an Appli Drive of his own and unlocks its ability to bring Appmon to life, meeting his future partner, Gatchmon. Together, they must restore the balance between the two worlds that was upset by the computer named Leviathan, after it uses a virus to hack everyone's systems.\n\nThere have been nine Digimon movies released in Japan. The first seven were directly connected to their respective anime series; \"Digital Monster X-Evolution\" originated from the Digimon Chronicle merchandise line. All movies except \"X-Evolution\" and \"Ultimate Power! Activate Burst Mode\" have been released and distributed internationally. \"\", released in the U.S. and Canada territory by Fox Kids through 20th Century Fox on October 6, 2000, consists of the union of the first three Japanese movies.\n\n\nA stereoscopic 3D movie, Digimon Adventure 3D: Digimon Grand Prix! (デジモンアドベンチャー3D デジモングランプリ! Dejimon Adobenchā: Dejimon Guran Puri?), was shown at Harmony Land in Sanrio Puroland in July 2000. The movie was later screened at the 'Tobidasu 3D! Toei Animation Festival' on October 3, 2009 and was later included on a set of DVD works released on February 21, 2010.\n\nUnited States\n\nCanada\n\nUnited Kingdom\n\nOther areas\n\nDigimon first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga “C'mon Digimon,” released in the summer of 1997. C'mon Digimon spawned the popular \"Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01\" manga, written by Hiroshi Izawa, which began serialization on November 21, 1998.\n\nA Chinese manhua was written and drawn by Yuen Wong Yu (余 遠鍠 \"Yu Yuen-wong\"), who based its storyline on the television series. This adaptation covers \"Digimon Adventure\" in five volumes, \"Digimon Adventure 02\" in two, \"Digimon Tamers\" in four, and \"Digimon Frontier\" in three. The original stories are heavily abridged, though on rare occasions events play out differently from the anime.\n\nThe Cantonese language version was published by Rightman Publishing Ltd. in Hong Kong.\n\nTwo English versions were also released. The first one was published by Chuang Yi in Singapore. The second one, which was adapted by Lianne Sentar, was released by TOKYOPOP in North America.<br>The three volumes for \"Digimon Frontier\" have been released by Chuang Yi in English. These have not been released by TOKYOPOP in North America or Europe. However, the Chuang Yi releases of \"Digimon Frontier\" were distributed by Madman Entertainment in Australia.\n\nDark Horse Comics published American-style Digimon comic books, adapting the first thirteen episodes of the English dub of \"Digimon Adventure\" in 2001. The story was written by Daniel Horn and Ryan Hill, and illustrated by Daniel Horn and Cara L. Niece.\n\nThe Italian publishing company, Panini, approached Digimon in different ways in different countries. While Germany created their own adaptations of episodes, the United Kingdom (UK) reprinted the Dark Horse titles, then translated some of the German adaptations of \"Adventure 02\" episodes. Eventually the UK comics were given their own original stories, which appeared in both the UK's official \"Digimon Magazine\" and the official UK Fox Kids companion magazine, \"Wickid\". These original stories only roughly followed the continuity of \"Adventure 02\". When the comic switched to the \"Tamers\" series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly; sometimes it would expand on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime (such as Mitsuo Yamaki's past) or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies (such as Ryo's story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005). In a money saving venture, the original stories were later removed from \"Digimon Magazine\", which returned to printing translated German adaptations of \"Tamers\" episodes. Eventually, both magazines were cancelled.\n\nThe Digimon series has a large number of video games which usually have their own independent storylines with a few sometimes tying into the stories of the anime series or manga series. The games consists of a number of genres including life simulation, adventure, video card game, strategy and racing games, though they are mainly action role-playing games. The games released in North America are: \"Digimon World\", \"Digimon World 2\", \"Digimon World 3\", \"Digimon World 4\", \"Digimon Digital Card Battle\", \"Digimon Rumble Arena\", \"Digimon Rumble Arena 2\", \"Digimon Battle Spirit\", \"Digimon Battle Spirit 2\", \"Digimon Racing\", \"Digimon World DS\", \"Digimon World Data Squad\", \"Digimon World Dawn and Dusk\", \"Digimon World Championship\", and \"Digimon Masters\".\n\nIn late 2009, Bandai created a webpage in Japanese showing a new game to be released in 2010 called \"\", which uses the same engine as their predecessors \"Digimon World DS\" and \"Digimon World Dawn and Dusk\" and was released on July 1, 2010. In February 2010, a website for the online multiplayer game, \"Digimon Battle Online\", was launched, showing it to be based primarily in the world of the Tamers saga and its characters.\n\nOn September 22, 2011, online game publisher Joymax announced the release of an MMORPG game called \"Digimon Masters\", which was developed by the Korean publisher DIGITALIC.\n\nIn 2011, Bandai posted a countdown on a teaser site. Once the countdown was finished, it revealed a reboot of the Digimon World series titled \"\". An enhanced version of the game released on Nintendo 3DS as \"Digimon World Re:Digitize Decode\" in 2013.\n\nA new fighting game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 was revealed in the summer of 2014, named \"Digimon All-Star Rumble\". It was released in North America, Europe and Australia in November of the same year. \"\", a role-playing game in the \"Digimon Story\" sub-series, was released in 2015 for PlayStation Vita and PlayStation 4 in Japan. It has also been released with English subtitles in North America and the rest of the world in 2016.\n\nThe Digimon Collectible Card Game is a card game based on Digimon, first introduced in Japan in 1997 and published by Bandai. The third season (\"Digimon Tamers\") utilized this aspect of the franchise by making the card game an integral part of the season. Versions of the card game are also included in some of the Digimon video games including \"Digital Card Battle\" and \"Digimon World 3\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8837", "title": "David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty", "text": "David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty\n\nAdmiral of the Fleet David Richard Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty (17 January 1871 – 11 March 1936) was a Royal Navy officer. After serving in the Mahdist War and then the response to the Boxer Rebellion, he commanded the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron at the Battle of Jutland in 1916, a tactically indecisive engagement after which his aggressive approach was contrasted with the caution of his commander Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. He is remembered for his comment at Jutland that \"There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today\", after two of his ships exploded. Later in the war he succeeded Jellicoe as Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet, in which capacity he received the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet at the end of the war. He then followed Jellicoe's path a second time, serving as First Sea Lord—a position that Beatty held longer (7 years 9 months) than any other First Sea Lord in history. While First Sea Lord, he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller ratio fleets of 1.75 each.\n\nBeatty was born into an Anglo-Irish family at Howbeck Lodge in the parish of Stapeley, near Nantwich, Cheshire, on 17 January 1871. He was the second son of five children born to Captain David Longfield Beatty and Katherine (or Katrine) Edith Beatty (née Sadleir), both from Ireland: David Longfield had been an officer in the Fourth Hussars where he formed a relationship with Katrine, the wife of another officer.\n\nKatrine had fair hair and blue eyes, soft wide lips, and overall an air of command. Beatty's father was tall, dark haired with big hands and feet. Both David and his elder brother Charles were short, about with small hands and feet. Charles was fair haired taking after his mother's features, whereas David had more the look of his father. After the affair between David Longfield and Katrine became known, David Longfield's father (Beatty's grandfather), David Vandeleur Beatty (1815–1881), arranged for his son to be posted to India in the hope that the scandalous relationship might end. David Longfield resigned from the regiment on 21 November 1865, with the honorary rank of Captain. He took up residence with Katrine in Cheshire and in 1869 sold his commission. David Longfield was unable to marry Katrine until Katrine had obtained a divorce on 21 February 1871, after the birth of their first two sons. Beatty's birth certificate recorded his mother's surname as Beatty, and his parents' eventual marriage at St Michael's Church in Liverpool was kept secret.\n\nBeatty's early education concentrated on horsemanship, hunting and learning to be a gentleman. Beatty had a close relationship with his elder brother Charles, who became his ally against their oppressive and overbearing father. They remained close throughout life, so much so that the only time Beatty felt despair was at his brother's death. Beatty later wrote to his wife about Charles, \"we lived together, played together, rode together, fought together.\" His brothers would later join the British Army, but early on young David developed an interest in ships and the sea and expressed a desire to join the Royal Navy. In 1881 Beatty's grandfather died and David Longfield succeeded to the 18th century mansion, 'Borodale', outside Enniscorthy, in County Wexford. After retiring from the army David Longfield established a business training horses first in Cheshire and then at 'The Mount', near Rugby, Warwickshire. On inheriting and following the death of his wife at 'The Mount', David Longfield returned to Ireland abandoning the training business.\n\nBeatty was educated at Kilkenny College and in 1882 entered Burney's Naval Academy at Gosport, which was a 'crammer' for boys wishing to take the entrance examinations for the Royal Navy.\n\nBeatty joined the Royal Navy as a cadet passing into the training ship HMS \"Britannia\" tenth out of ninety-nine candidates in January 1884. During his two years at \"Britannia\", moored at Dartmouth, he was beaten three times for various infractions. He passed out of \"Britannia\" eighteenth out of the thirty-three remaining cadets at the end of 1885. Beatty's letters home made no complaint about the poor living conditions in \"Britannia\", and generally he was extrovert, even aggressive, and resented discipline. However, he understood how far he could transgress without serious consequences, and this approach continued throughout his career.\n\nBeatty was given orders to join the China Station in January 1886, but the posting did not appeal to his mother, who wrote to Lord Charles Beresford, then a senior naval officer, member of parliament and personal friend, to use his influence to obtain something better. Beatty was, in February 1886, instead appointed to HMS \"Alexandra\", flagship of Admiral the Duke of Edinburgh, Queen Victoria's second son, who was Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Squadron. This proved an excellent social opening for Beatty, who established a longstanding relationship with the Duke's eldest daughter, Marie, and with other members of the court. \"Alexandra\" was a three-masted sailing ship with auxiliary steam power, nonetheless, remaining flagship in a navy which was steadily transitioning from sail to steam. Life in the Mediterranean fleet was considerably easier than cadet life, with visits to friendly ports all around the Mediterranean, but Beatty was concerned to work diligently towards naval examinations, which would determine seniority and future promotion prospects. Beatty was promoted to midshipman on 15 May 1886 and assigned to assist Lieutenant Stanley Colville on watchkeeping duties: Colville was to play an important part in Beatty's future career.\n\nBeatty left HMS \"Alexandra\" in March 1889 and joined the cruiser HMS \"Warspite\" in July 1889 for manoeuvres before joining the sailing corvette HMS \"Ruby\" in September 1889, in which he was promoted to sub-lieutenant on 14 May 1890. Next he attended courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich during which he was somewhat distracted from his naval career by the delights of London. Beatty scored a first-class examination pass in Torpedoes, but only seconds in Seamanship, Gunnery and Pilotage, and a third in Navigation. A biography states that \"his cabin at Greenwich was full of photographs of actresses, some of which were signed in the most endearing terms\". After attending the gunnery school, HMS \"Excellent\", he undertook a posting to a torpedo boat in July 1891 and then a tour in HMS \"Nile\" from 19 January 1892.\n\nBeatty joined the Royal Yacht \"Victoria and Albert\" in July 1892 while Queen Victoria was holidaying in the Mediterranean: Victoria was in mourning for her grandson, Albert Duke of Clarence, who had died January 1892. Promoted to lieutenant on 25 August 1892, he rejoined HMS \"Ruby\" in August 1892 and then transferred to the battleship HMS \"Camperdown\" in September 1893 (which had only recently been involved in the fleet accident where she had rammed and sunk the battleship HMS \"Victoria\"). He transferred to the battleship HMS \"Trafalgar\" in September 1895.\n\nBeatty gained recognition during the Mahdist War for his actions in the campaign to recapture the Sudan. Stanley Colville was placed in command of the gunboats attached to the British expeditionary force in Egypt and as Beatty's former commander in HMS \"Trafalgar\" and superior in HMS \"Alexandra\" he requested that Beatty join him. Control of the river Nile was considered vitally important for any expedition into Egypt and the Sudan. Beatty was seconded to the Egyptian government on 3 June 1896 and appointed second in command of the river flotilla. Colville was wounded during the operation, leaving Beatty in command of the gunboats for the successful attack on Dongola. The campaign halted at Dongola to regroup and Beatty returned to Britain on leave. He was commended by Kitchener for his part in the campaign and as a result was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.\n\nBeatty was again seconded to the Egyptian government for the next phase of the campaign. This was now at Lord Kitchener's specific request, for the Khartoum expedition. Beatty first commanded the gunboat \"El Teb\" but this was capsized attempting to ascend the Fourth Cataract. Beatty then took command of gunboat \"Fateh\" between October 1897 and August 1898: the gunboats were frequently in action advancing along the Nile ahead of the army and saw action at the Battle of Omdurman, where Beatty made the acquaintance of Winston Churchill who had become a cavalry officer in Beatty's father's old regiment, the 4th Hussars, and had there learnt his family history. In a few hours 10,000 Dervishes were killed by rifle and machine gun fire without any of them getting within 600 yards of the British force. This battle marked the effective end of resistance to the expeditionary force, but the gunboats were called into service to transport troops to Fashoda, south along the White Nile, where a small force of French troops had made a difficult land crossing and staked a claim to the area. Despite the ensuing crisis, the French were persuaded to withdraw without incident. Kitchener commended Beatty for his efforts in the campaign and as a result Beatty was promoted to commander, ahead of 400 other lieutenants, on 15 November 1898.\n\nBeatty was appointed executive officer of the small battleship HMS \"Barfleur\", flagship of the China Station, on 20 April 1899. The first year of his tour of duty was uneventful, but unrest against foreigners was growing in China. The Boxer movement was a secret Chinese peasant society committed to resisting oppression both from foreigners and from the Chinese government. The Empress Dowager Tzu-hsi partly encouraged the Boxer's opposition to foreigners in an attempt to turn their attention away from herself. The name was derived from ritual exercises supposed to make their users immune to bullets, which resembled boxing.\n\nIn the summer of 1900 the rebellion reached Peking, where the German legation was attacked and foreign nationals withdrew to the relative safety of the Legation Quarter. Government troops joined forces with the rebels and the railway to the Treaty Port of Tientsin was interrupted. Admiral Sir Edward Seymour, then the Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, sent reinforcements to Peking, but they were insufficient to defend the Legation. An attempt was therefore made to send more troops from Tientsin, where British ships had been joined by French, German, Russian, American, Austrian, Italian and Japanese. The international naval brigade force of naval marines placed itself under the senior officer present, which was Seymour. After an urgent call for help from the Legation, Seymour set out on 10 June 1900 with 2,000 troops to attempt to break through to Peking in the Seymour Expedition. The force got about half way before abandoning the attempt because the railway line had been torn up. By now rebels had begun destroying the track behind the force, cutting it off from Tientsin.\nOn 11 June 1900, Beatty and 150 men from HMS \"Barfleur\" landed as part of a force of 2,400 defending Tientsin from 15,000 Chinese troops plus Boxers. On 16 June 1900 the Taku forts were bombarded and captured to ensure ships could still reach the port. Fierce fighting broke out throughout the foreign areas and railway station, and Beatty was injured. He later took part in the successful relief of the naval brigade and was promoted to captain on 8 November 1900. Beatty returned to Britain, where he required an operation to restore proper use of his left arm.\n\nBeatty had returned from leave after the Sudan campaign, but finding life in Ireland at the family home not to his taste, stayed instead with his brother at Newmarket, Suffolk. The location allowed him good hunting, and access to aristocratic houses where his recent heroic reputation from the campaign made him an honoured guest. Out hunting one day he chanced to meet Ethel Tree, daughter of Chicago department store founder Marshall Field. Beatty was immediately taken with her, for her good looks and her ability to hunt. The immediate difficulty with the match was that Ethel was married already to Arthur Tree, with a son, Ronald Tree.\n\nAfter the Boxer Campaign, the couple had at first exchanged letters, which Beatty signed 'Jack', as Ethel was still a married woman and discretion was advised. Ethel became involved with another man and the exchange of letters ceased but on Beatty's return she sent him a telegram and letter inviting him to resume their friendship. Beatty did not respond until after surgery on his arm in September 1900 when he wrote, \"I landed from China with my heart full of rage, and swore I did not care if I ever saw you again, or if I were killed or not. And now I have arrived with the firm determination not to see you at all in my own mind... Unfortunately I shall go on loving you to the bitter end... To me always a Queen, if not always mine, Good-bye.\"\n\nDespite this estrangement, the couple again met foxhunting and resumed a discreet relationship. Marshall Field was at first unimpressed by the impecunious Beatty as a future son-in-law, but was persuaded by his heroic reputation, impressive record of promotion and future prospects. There was the possibility that Field might revoke the settlement he had made on his daughter at the time of her first marriage and the new couple would have no means of support. Beatty's father was also unhappy about the match, fearing a repeat of the difficulties he had faced with his own relationship with a married woman, but with the added risk of publicity because both Beatty and Ethel were famous and the risk that Beatty's illegitimacy might be exposed. Beatty went so far as to consult a fortune teller, Mrs. Roberts, who predicted a fine outcome to the match. Ethel wrote to Arthur, telling him that it was her firm intention never to live with him again as his wife, though not naming any particular person or reason. Arthur agreed to co-operate, and filed for divorce in America on the grounds of desertion, which was granted 9 May 1901. Beatty and Ethel married on 22 May 1901 at the registry office, St. George's, Hanover Square, London with no family attending. Although Arthur Tree was himself from a wealthy American family, he now had to adjust to reduced circumstances without Ethel's support. He elected to remain in Britain and their son Ronald remained with him. Ronald and his mother were never reconciled from his perception that she had deserted his father, but he visited in later life and became friendly with Beatty. Ronald later became a member of parliament and, during the Second World War became a link between the British and United States governments, lending his country house, Ditchley Park near Oxford, to Winston Churchill for weekend visits when the official residences were considered unsafe. Beatty and Ethel set up home at Hanover Lodge in Regent's Park, London.\n\nThe couple had two sons, David Field Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty (1905–1972) born at the Capua Palace in Malta, and the Hon. Peter Randolph Louis Beatty (1910–1949). His marriage to a very wealthy heiress allowed Beatty an independence that most other officers lacked. She is reputed to have commented after he was threatened with disciplinary action following the straining of his ship's engines, \"What? Court-martial my David? I'll buy them a new ship.\"\n\nIn May 1902 he was passed fit for sea duty and was appointed captain of the cruiser HMS \"Juno\" on 2 June, spending two months in exercises with the Channel Fleet under Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson before joining the Mediterranean Fleet. Beatty worked hard to raise efficiency so that she was highly rated in gunnery and other competitions by the time he left the ship 19 December 1902. Ethel decided not to be left behind so rented the Capua Palace on Malta, home port of the Mediterranean Fleet, where she became part of the island's high society.\n\nBeatty took command of the cruiser HMS \"Arrogant\" in the Mediterranean Fleet in November 1903 and then commanded the cruiser HMS \"Suffolk\" in the Mediterranean Fleet from October 1904. He then became the naval advisor to the Army Council in 1906 and, after having been appointed a naval Aide-de-Camp to the King on 5 November 1908, he became captain of the battleship HMS \"Queen\" in the Atlantic Fleet in December 1908. He was promoted to rear-admiral on 1 January 1910 by a special order in council since he had not completed the requisite time as a captain. He was offered the post of second-in-command of the Atlantic Fleet, but declined it and asked for one in the Home Fleet. As the Atlantic Fleet post was a major command, the Admiralty were very unimpressed and his attitude nearly ruined his career. Beatty, as a rapidly promoted war hero, with no financial worries and with a degree of support in Royal circles, felt more confident than most naval officers in standing firm on requesting a posting nearer home. He was approaching two years on half pay (which would trigger automatic retirement from the navy) when on 8 January 1912 his career was saved by the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Churchill had met Beatty when Beatty was commander of a gunboat on the Nile supporting the army at the Battle of Omdurman, in which Churchill took part as a cavalry officer. A \"probably apocryphal\" story relates that as Beatty walked into Churchill's office at the Admiralty, Churchill looked him over and said, \"You seem very young to be an Admiral.\" Unfazed, Beatty replied, \"And you seem very young to be First Lord.\" Churchill – who was himself only thirty-eight years old in 1912 – took to him immediately and he was appointed Naval Secretary.\nBeatty became Rear-Admiral Commanding the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron on 1 March 1913. Beatty was late taking up his new post, choosing not to cut short a holiday in Monte Carlo. On his eventual arrival, he set about drafting standing orders regarding how the squadron was to operate. He noted, \"Captains...to be successful must possess, in a marked degree, initiative, resource, determination, and no fear of accepting responsibility\". He went on \"...as a rule instructions will be of a very general character so as to avoid interfering with the judgement and initiative of captains...The admiral will rely on captains to use all the information at their disposal to grasp the situation quickly and anticipate his wishes, using their own discretion as to how to act in unforeseen circumstances...\" The approach outlined by Beatty contradicted the views of many within the navy, who felt that ships should always be closely controlled by their commanding admiral, and harked back to reforms attempted by Admiral George Tryon. It is argued that Tryon had attempted to introduce greater independence and initiative amongst his captains, which he believed would be essential in the confusion of a real war situation, but had ironically been killed in an accident caused by captains rigorously obeying incorrect but precise orders issued by Tryon himself.\n\nBeatty chose Lieutenant Ralph Seymour as his flag lieutenant, despite Seymour being unknown to him. Seymour had aristocratic connections, which may have appealed to Beatty since he sought connections in society, but it was also the case that Seymour's sister was a longstanding close friend of Churchill's wife. Appointments by influence were common in the navy at this time, but the significance of Beatty's choice lay in Seymour's relative inexperience as a signals officer, which later resulted in difficulties in battle.\n\nOn the eve of the First World War in 1914, Beatty was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath and promoted to acting vice-admiral a month later. He was confirmed in the rank of vice-admiral on 9 August 1915. He led the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron at the actions at Heligoland Bight (1914), Dogger Bank (1915) and Jutland (1916).\n\nJutland proved to be decisive in Beatty's career, despite the loss of two of his battlecruisers. Beatty is reported to have remarked (to his Flag Captain, Ernle Chatfield, later First Sea Lord in the early 1930s), \"there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today,\" after two of them had exploded within half an hour during the battle. In any case Beatty's actions succeeded in drawing the German High Seas Fleet into action against the British Grand Fleet.\n\nBeatty succeeded Admiral John Jellicoe as commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet and received promotion to the acting rank of admiral in December 1916. With his dashing style, he was the antithesis of his predecessor. Beatty's marriage was failing disastrously at the time, and the result was to be a decade-long love affair between Beatty and Eugénie Godfrey-Faussett, wife of Captain Bryan Godfrey-Faussett. Under Beatty's command the Grand Fleet maintained its dominance of the North Sea until the end of the War.\n\nBeatty escorted the German High Seas Fleet to internment at Scapa Flow in November 1918 giving the order from his flagship that \"the German Flag will be hauled down at sunset and will not be raised again without permission\". This was not a lawful order, as the fleet remained the property of the German Government having been interned rather than having surrendered, but nevertheless Beatty enforced it.\n\nBeatty was promoted to full admiral on 1 January 1919 and to Admiral of the Fleet on 1 May 1919. He was created 1st Earl Beatty, Viscount Borodale and Baron Beatty of the North Sea and Brooksby on 18 October 1919. He became First Sea Lord on 1 November 1919. In this capacity he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller fleets.\n\nDuring the First Labour Government of 1924, with Japan increasingly hostile to the UK, Beatty lobbied the Clynes Committee for construction of the Singapore Naval Base to continue. Beatty wrote out, but did not send, a threat of resignation. The government were trying to cut back on the numbers of cruisers constructed; the other Sea Lords attributed the building of the \"Kent\" class to Beatty's lobbying, but government desire to alleviate shipyard unemployment was probably a more important factor.\n\nDespite further rumours that he would resign, Beatty remained in office when the Conservatives took power in the autumn of 1924. Supported by the First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman, he clashed with the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Winston Churchill, once again over the number of cruisers required by the Royal Navy. At this stage of his career Churchill was opposed to what he saw as excessive defence spending. This may seem odd in light of his previous and subsequent reputation, but in the 1920s no major war seemed to be on the horizon. Beatty also at this time pressed hard for the return of responsibility for naval aviation from the newly formed Royal Air Force to the Royal Navy.\n\nIn 1926 Beatty was considered for the post of Governor General of Canada but was rejected by the Colonial Secretary Leo Amery as he had \"no manners and an impossible American wife\".\n\nBy the time of his retirement from the Royal Navy in July 1927 a great deal of time was being spent preparing for the Coolidge Conference in Geneva, although Beatty did not himself attend as he had to remain in London to supervise the deployment of naval and marine forces against nationalist unrest in China and Egypt. On his last day in office (30 July) he attended a Cabinet at which Bridgeman reported the breakdown of the Geneva Conference as the Americans refused to accept any gun smaller than 8-inch for their cruisers, and after leaving office he congratulated Bridgeman that the Americans had not been able to achieve \"command of the sea at any cost\". Beatty was appointed a member of the Privy Council on 25 July 1927. Stephen Roskill wrote that whilst Beatty and his disciple Chatfield deserve some praise for the Royal Navy's comparative readiness in 1939, his main achievement was to maintain the morale of the Navy at a time of serious defence cuts, and that without his strong leadership the Royal Navy might have suffered more events like the Invergordon Mutiny of 1931.\n\nBeatty spent much of his life (when not at sea) in Leicestershire, and lived at Brooksby Hall and Dingley Hall. Beatty's old commander Admiral John Jellicoe died on 19 November 1935. Already suffering from heart failure, and sick with influenza, Beatty defied doctors' orders and left his bed to act as a pallbearer, saying, \"What will the Navy say if I fail to attend Jellicoe's funeral?\" He was so obviously ill that, as the funeral procession passed up Fleet Street, a bystander sent a glass of brandy out to him. He also insisted on attending the funeral of King George V in January 1936. These acts hastened his own death.\n\nBeatty died at around 1 am on 12 March 1936.\nAt Beatty's funeral his coffin was draped in the Union Flag flown by his flagship in 1919. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Lang, said \"In him something of the spirit of Nelson seemed to have come back\". The Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, called in the House of Commons for a public memorial to Beatty to be erected, but no action was taken until after the Second World War, when busts of Beatty and Jellicoe were unveiled in Trafalgar Square on 21 October (Trafalgar Day) 1948.\n\nBeatty had requested in his will that he would like to be buried next to his wife Ethel at Dingley: however he was actually buried at St Paul's Cathedral and therefore the double grave at Dingley Church contains only his wife's body.\n\nA number of serious errors have been identified in Beatty's handling of his squadron at the Battle of Jutland:\n\nAfter the war a report of the battle was prepared by the Admiralty under First Sea Lord Rosslyn Wemyss. Before the report was published, Beatty was himself appointed First Sea Lord, and immediately requested amendments to the report. When the authors refused to comply, he ordered it to be destroyed and instead had prepared an alternative report, which proved highly critical of Jellicoe. Considerable argument broke out as a result, with significant numbers of servicemen disputing the published version, including Admiral Reginald Bacon, who wrote his own book about the battle, criticising the version sponsored by Beatty and highly critical of Beatty's own part in the battle.\n\nBesides actively encouraging the publication of books and articles designed to praise his role at the Battle of Jutland and denigrate Jellicoe's, after his retirement Beatty assisted with the preparation of a 5,200 line poem \"The Epic of Jutland\" by Shane Leslie.\n\n\nBeatty was granted the Freedom of the City of London on 16 June 1919 at the same ceremony as Lord Haig. In June 1920, the Great Central Railway gave the name \"Earl Beatty\" to one of their newly built 4-6-0 express passenger locomotives, no. 1164 of class 9P (LNER class B3). It carried the name until withdrawal in September 1947.\n\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "8838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8838", "title": "Dictum of Kenilworth", "text": "Dictum of Kenilworth\n\nThe Dictum of Kenilworth, issued on 31 October 1266, was a pronouncement designed to reconcile the rebels of the Barons' War with the royal government of England. After the baronial victory at the Battle of Lewes in 1264, Simon de Montfort took control of royal government, but at the Battle of Evesham the next year Montfort was killed, and King Henry III restored to power. A group of rebels held out in the stronghold of Kenilworth Castle, however, and their resistance proved hard to crush.\n\nA siege of the castle was started, but through papal intervention King Henry later entered on a more conciliatory path. A commission was appointed to draw up an arrangement that would be acceptable to both sides. The resulting Dictum of Kenilworth offered the rebels the right to buy back forfeited estates, at prices depending on their level of involvement in the rebellion. After initial resistance, the terms were eventually accepted. By the summer of 1267, the country was pacified, and this spirit of reconciliation would last until the 1290s. The Dictum of Kenilworth was later incorporated into the Statute of Marlborough.\n\nAt the Battle of Lewes in 1264, the rebellious barons, led by Simon de Montfort, had defeated the royal army and taken King Henry III captive. For the next year, the reins of government were in Montfort's hands, but his support soon began to crumble. On 4 August 1265, Montfort faced an army led by Prince Edward (later King Edward I) and the powerful Earl of Gloucester, who had recently defected to the royalist side, at the Battle of Evesham. The battle resulted in a complete royal victory; Montfort was killed, and King Henry III was restored to full power.\n\nPart of the rebellious forces held out, however, and their stronghold was the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle. In the summer of 1266, a siege of the castle was initiated, but the effort proved futile. There were rumours that Montfort's son Simon was planning an invasion of England from Normandy, and this was the hope that the rebels hung on to. It was in this situation that the papal legate Ottobuono Fieschi exerted his influence, to make the king pursue a more conciliatory policy. In August, the king summoned a parliament at Kenilworth, where the siege was ongoing. He commissioned a number of earls, barons and bishops to draft a treaty of reconciliation.\n\nThe commission was created by parliament appointing three bishops and three barons, who then selected one more bishop, two earls, and three more barons.\nThe final committee consisted of the bishops of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Worcester and St. David's, the earls of Gloucester and Hereford, and six barons. This committee was given until All Saints Day (1 November) to come up with provisions for a settlement. The result, known as the Dictum of Kenilworth, was made public on 31 October 1266.\n\nThe primary point of the Dictum was the re-establishment of royal authority. The Provisions of Oxford, that had been forced on the king, were repudiated, and it was made clear that the appointment of ministers was entirely a royal prerogative. King Henry in turn reconfirmed Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest. Measures were taken to renounce the increasing veneration of the fallen Simon de Montfort, whom some were already starting to consider a martyr and a possible saint.\n\nThe rebels had previously been completely disinherited, and their land taken into the king's hands. The Dictum instead extended a pardon, and restored land to their previous owners, contingent on payment of certain penalties that were proportional to the level of involvement in the rebellion. It was traditional to value land at ten times its annual yield, and most of the rebels were subsequently fined at half of this amount: five times the annual yield of their lands.\n\nRobert Ferrers, Earl of Derby, was singled out in particular for his central involvement in the rebellion, and for him the multiple was seven rather than five. The same was the case for Henry de Hastings, who was the commander of Kenilworth Castle. Those who had not taken part in the fighting themselves, but had incited others to rise up against the king, were fined at two years' value, while those who had been compelled to fight, or played only a minor part, had to pay one year's value of their land. The proceedings from the fines were awarded to royal supporters, some of whom had already been awarded parts of the rebels' land, and now had to give it back.\n\nHostilities did not end with the publication of the Dictum. The garrison at Kenilworth refused to accept the terms given, and held out until 14 December, when deprivation forced them to surrender. In April 1267, the earl of Gloucesterwho had been central both to the royal victory at Evesham and to the drafting of the Dictumturned against the king. He occupied the city of London, and set himself up as the champion of the disinherited. After negotiations involving both Edward and Ottobuono, Gloucester relented, and by June a settlement was reached. Gloucester had forced a change to the conditions of the Dictum, whereby the disinherited were allowed to recover their lands before they had paid their fines rather than after; an arrangement that made repayment much easier. In the summer of that year, Prince Edward moved at the Isle of Ely, where the last of the rebels still held out, and forced them into submission under terms favourable to the rebels.\n\nIn November 1267, parliament met at Marlborough. Here an important provision was issued that would become known to history as the Statute of Marlborough. This statute incorporated the clauses of the Dictum of Kenilworth that dealt with the restoration of royal power, and reconciliation between the loyalists and the rebels. The Statute of Marlborough became a basis for royal government, and the relationship between the king and his subjects, and as such the Dictum lived on in English constitutional history.\n\nThe spirit of peace and reconciliation established by the Dictum of Kenilworth lasted for the remainder of Henry III's reign and into the 1290s. In 1270, Prince Edward left the country to go on crusade in the Holy Land. When his father died in 1272, Edward felt in a safe enough position to wait until 1274 before returning home to claim the throne.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8839", "title": "London Docklands", "text": "London Docklands\n\nLondon Docklands is the name for the riverfront and formal docks in London, capital of the United Kingdom, based around east and south east London respectively. It forms part of the boroughs of Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Lewisham, Newham and Greenwich. The docks were formerly part of the Port of London, at one time the world's largest port. They have now been redeveloped principally for commercial and residential use. The name London Docklands was used for the first time in a government report on redevelopment plans in 1971 and has since become virtually universally adopted. It also created conflict between the new and old communities of the London Docklands.\n\nIn Roman and medieval times, ships tended to dock at small quays in the present-day city of London or Southwark, an area known as the \"Pool of London\". However, this gave no protection against the elements, was vulnerable to thieves and suffered from a lack of space at the quayside. The Howland Great Dock in Rotherhithe (built 1696 and later forming the core of the Surrey Commercial Docks) was designed to address these problems, providing a large, secure and sheltered anchorage with room for 120 large vessels. It was a major commercial success and provided for two phases of expansion during the Georgian and Victorian eras. \nThe first of the Georgian docks was the West India (opened 1802), followed by the London (1805), the East India (also 1805), the Surrey (1807), the Regent's Canal Dock (1820), St Katharine (1828) and the West India South (1829). The Victorian docks were mostly further east, comprising the Royal Victoria (1855), Millwall (1868) and Royal Albert (1880). The King George V Dock was a late addition in 1921.\n\nThree principal kinds of docks existed. Wet docks were where ships were laid up at anchor and loaded or unloaded. Dry docks, which were far smaller, took individual ships for repairing. Ships were built at dockyards along the riverside. In addition, the river was lined with innumerable warehouses, piers, jetties and dolphins (mooring points). The various docks tended to specialise in different forms of produce. The Surrey Docks concentrated on timber, for instance; Millwall took grain; St Katharine took wool, sugar and rubber; and so on.\n\nThe docks required an army of workers, chiefly lightermen (who carried loads between ships and quays aboard small barges called lighters) and quayside workers, who dealt with the goods once they were ashore. Some of the workers were highly skilled - the lightermen had their own livery company or guild, while the deal porters (workers who carried timber) were famous for their acrobatic skills. Most were unskilled and worked as casual labourers. They assembled at certain points, such as pubs, each morning, where they were selected more or less at random by foremen. For these workers, it was effectively a lottery as to whether they would get work - and pay, and food - on any particular day. This arrangement continued until as late as 1965, although it was somewhat regularised after the creation of the National Dock Labour Scheme in 1947.\n\nThe main dockland areas were originally low-lying marshes, mostly unsuitable for agriculture and lightly populated. With the establishment of the docks, the dock workers formed a number of tight-knit local communities with their own distinctive cultures and slang. Poor communications meant that they were quite remote from other parts of London and so tended to develop in some isolation. The Isle of Dogs, for instance, could only be accessed by road via two swing-bridges. Local sentiment there was so strong that Ted Johns, a local community campaigner, and his supporters, in protest at the lack of social provision from the state, proclaimed a unilateral declaration of independence for the area, setting up a so-called 'Island Council' with Johns himself as its elected leader, and blocked off the two roads coming in from the mainland.\n\nThe docks were originally built and managed by a number of competing private companies. From 1909, they were managed by the Port of London Authority, or PLA, which amalgamated the companies in a bid to make the docks more efficient and improve labour relations. The PLA constructed the last of the docks, the King George V, in 1921, as well as greatly expanding the Tilbury docks.\n\nGerman bombing during World War II caused massive damage to the docks with 380,000 tons of timber destroyed in the Surrey Docks in a single night. Nonetheless, following post-war rebuilding they experienced a resurgence of prosperity in the 1950s. The end came suddenly, between approximately 1960 and 1970, when the shipping industry adopted the newly invented container system of cargo transportation. London's docks were unable to accommodate the much larger vessels needed by containerization and the shipping industry moved to deep-water ports such as Tilbury and Felixstowe. Between 1960 and 1980, all of London's docks were closed, leaving around eight square miles (21 km²) of derelict land in East London. Unemployment was high, and poverty and other social problems were rife.\n\nEfforts to redevelop the docks began almost as soon as they were closed, although it took a decade for most plans to move beyond the drawing board and another decade for redevelopment to take full effect. The situation was greatly complicated by the large number of landowners involved: the PLA, the Greater London Council (GLC), the British Gas Corporation, five borough councils, British Rail and the Central Electricity Generating Board.\n\nTo address this problem, in 1981 the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, formed the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to redevelop the area. This was a statutory body appointed and funded by central government (a quango), with wide powers to acquire and dispose of land in the Docklands. It also served as the development planning authority for the area.\n\nAnother important government intervention was the designation in 1982 of an enterprise zone, an area in which businesses were exempt from property taxes and had other incentives, including simplified planning and capital allowances. This made investing in the Docklands a significantly more attractive proposition and was instrumental in starting a property boom in the area.\n\nLDDC was controversial - it was accused of favouring elitist luxury developments rather than affordable housing, and it was unpopular with the local communities, who felt that their needs were not being addressed. Nonetheless, the LDDC was central to a remarkable transformation in the area, although how far it was in control of events is debatable. It was wound up in 1998 when control of the Docklands area was handed back to the respective local authorities.\n\nThe massive development programme managed by the LDDC during the 1980s and 1990s saw a huge area of the Docklands converted into a mixture of residential, commercial and light industrial space. The clearest symbol of the whole effort was the ambitious Canary Wharf project that constructed Britain's tallest building and established a second major financial centre in London. However, there is no evidence that LDDC foresaw this scale of development and nearby Heron Quays had already been developed as low density offices when Canary Wharf was proposed, with similar development already underway on Canary Wharf itself, Limehouse Studios being the most famous occupant.\n\nCanary Wharf was far from trouble free and the property slump of the early 1990s halted further development for several years. Developers found themselves saddled with property which they were unable to sell or let.\n\nThe Docklands historically had poor transport connections. This was addressed by the LDDC with the construction of the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which connected the Docklands with the City. It was a remarkably inexpensive development, costing only £77 million in its first phase, as it relied on reusing disused railway infrastructure and derelict land for much of its length. LDDC originally requested a full London Underground line, but the Government refused to fund it.\n\nLDDC also built Limehouse Link tunnel, a cut and cover road tunnel linking the Isle of Dogs to The Highway (the A1203 road) at a cost of over £150 million per kilometre, one of the most expensive stretches of road ever built.\n\nThe LDDC also contributed to the development of London City Airport (IATA airport code LCY), opened in October 1987 on the spine of the Royal Docks.\n\nIn 1999, the London Underground's Jubilee line was extended eastwards and now serves Rotherhithe/Surrey Quays at Canada Water station, the Isle of Dogs at Canary Wharf tube station, Greenwich at North Greenwich tube station and Canning Town station for the nearby Royal Docks. The Docklands Light Railway was extended in 1994 to serve much of the royal docks area when the Beckton branch was opened. The Isle of Dogs branch was further extended south and in 1999 it then served Greenwich Town Centre, including the Cutty Sark museum, Deptford and finally Lewisham. In 2005, a new branch of the DLR opened from Canning Town to serve what used to be the eastern terminus of the North London Line, including a station at London City Airport. It was then further extended to Woolwich Arsenal in 2009.\n\nThe continued success of the Docklands redevelopment has prompted several further development schemes, including:\n\n\nIn the early 21st century redevelopment is spreading into the more suburban parts of East and Southeast London, and into the parts of the counties of Kent and Essex which abut the Thames Estuary. See Thames Gateway and Lower Lea Valley for further information on this trend.\n\nThe London Buses D letter prefix series routes takes their name after the Docklands and all run on the north bank of the River Thames as part of the London bus network and act as feeder buses to the Docklands Light Railway. In the early stages of redevelopments, the network was developed, it was much larger but as transport rapidly improved across East London, the need for the D routes reduced and today only four remain; running primarily in Tower Hamlets as well as briefly into Newham and Hackney. Docklands Buses operates all routes apart from route D3 which is run by Stagecoach London.\n\nRoute D3 operates via these primary locations:\n\nBethnal Green \"Bonner Road\" Bethnal Green station Shoreditch \"Fakruddin Street\" Whitechapel \"Royal London Hospital\" Shadwell \"Chapman Street\" (westbound)/Shadwell station (eastbound) Wapping station Ratcliff \"Free Trade Wharf\" Limehouse station Limehouse \"Burdett Road\" Westferry station Canary Wharf station Blackwall \"Baffin Way\" East India station Leamouth \"Orchard Place\"\n\nRoute D6 operates via these primary locations:\n\nCambridge Heath \"Ash Grove\" Cambridge Heath station Bethnal Green station Globe Town \"Bonner Street\" Bow \"St Barnabas Church\" Mile End station Bow Common \"St Paul's Way/Turners Road\" Limehouse \"East India Dock Road\" Poplar \"All Saints Church/Bazeley Street\" Blackwall \"Aspen Way\" Coldharbour Cubitt Town \"Jack Dash House\" Crossharbour station Crossharbour \"ASDA\"\n\nRoute D7 operates via these primary locations:\n\nMile End station Bow Common \"St Paul's Way/Turners Road\" Limehouse \"East India Dock Road\" Westferry station Canary Wharf station \nMillwall \"Barkantine Clinic\" Island Gardens station \nCubitt Town \"St John's Park\" Coldharbour Blackwall \"Aspen Way\" Poplar \"All Saints Church\"\n\nRoute D8 operates via these primary locations:\n\nStratford bus station for \"Stratford station\" \nStratford High Street station \nBow Church (southbound) Bromley-by-Bow station South Bromley \"St Leonard's Wharf\" Poplar \"All Saints Church\" Blackwall \"Billingsgate Market\" Canary Wharf station Millwall \"Mastmakers Road\" South Quay station Crossharbour station Crossharbour \"ASDA\"\n\nOver the past 30 years, the population of the Docklands has more than doubled and the area has become both a major business centre and an increasingly desirable area to live. Canary Wharf has become one of Europe's biggest clusters of skyscrapers and a direct challenge to the financial dominance of the City of London.\n\nAlthough most of the old Dockland wharfs and warehouses have been demolished, some have been restored and converted into flats. Most of the docks themselves have survived and are now used as marinas or watersports centres, the major exception being the Surrey Commercial Docks which is now largely filled in. Although large ships can - and occasionally still do - visit the old docks, all of the commercial traffic has moved down-river.\n\nThe revival of the Docklands has had major effects in run-down surrounding areas. Greenwich and Deptford are undergoing large-scale redevelopment, chiefly as a result of the improved transport links making them more attractive to commuters.\n\nThe Docklands' redevelopment has, however, had some less beneficial aspects. The massive property boom and consequent rise in house prices has led to friction between the new arrivals and the old Docklands communities, who have complained of being squeezed out. It has also made for some of the most striking disparities to be seen anywhere in Britain: luxury executive flats constructed alongside run-down public housing estates.\n\nThe Docklands' status as a symbol of Margaret Thatcher's Britain has also made it a target for terrorists. After a failed attempt to bomb Canary Wharf in 1992, a large IRA bomb exploded at South Quay on 9 February 1996. Two people died in the explosion, forty people were injured and an estimated £150 million of damage was caused. This bombing ended an IRA ceasefire. In a 1998 trial James McArdle was imprisoned for 25 years after a trial at Woolwich Crown Court that ended on 24 June. Under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement and royal prerogative of mercy officially signed by Queen Elizabeth II, McArdle was released on 28 June 2000.\n\nLondon Docklands is served by its own free newspaper, \"The Docklands\", launched in 2006 by Archant London following the purchase of Docklands News, the ex-LDDC newspaper which was then owned by Ivy Communications. It is delivered weekly to properties and available to pick up from various locations in the area. It is the newspaper with the highest circulation in the area. A sister title, \"The Peninsula\", was launched in 2007, covering the Greenwich Peninsula.\n\nIn a further sign of regeneration in the area, the Docklands now has its own symphony orchestra - Docklands Sinfonia - which was formed in January 2009 and is based at St Anne's Limehouse.\n\nAt one time the offices of \"The Independent\" group of publications were situated in the Docklands. In 2008 Independent News & Media announced that \"The Independent\" would be moving its offices to the Northcliffe House in Kensington.\n\nCharles Dickens makes frequent use of the riverside and docklands in novels such as \"Our Mutual Friend\" and \"Great Expectations\", and there is a memorable description of the docks, their buildings and people, in Joseph Conrad's \"\".\n\nIn Juan Carlos Fresnadillo's 2007 movie \"28 Weeks Later\" the Docklands are the location of District 1, the most functional section of Britain during the outbreak of Rage Virus and the headquarters for Army Officials. The docklands also appear in \"The Ruby in the Smoke\", a novel by Philip Pullman.\n\nThe 1990s drama \"Bugs\" made extensive use of Docklands for filming throughout its four series. Although the script referred to an anonymous city rather than acknowledging its Docklands location, action took place in and around many then-familiar landmarks, from the London Arena to the Docklands Light Railway depot.\n\nIn the 1991 film \"Close my Eyes\", Richard (Clive Owen) works in the then-developing Docklands area, and remarks to his boss Colin (Karl Johnson) as to how much everything is rapidly changing, during a ride on the Docklands Light Railway.\n\nIn the comedy \"Not Going Out\", the main characters live in a flat located in the Docklands. Mickey Mouse was involved as part of a fundraising idea to help make money for the Docklands along with the Gruffalo. The TV series and book \"Call the Midwife\" is set in the 1950s in the Docklands as well.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8840", "title": "Diesel multiple unit", "text": "Diesel multiple unit\n\nA diesel multiple unit or DMU is a multiple-unit train powered by on-board diesel engines. A DMU requires no separate locomotive, as the engines are incorporated into one or more of the carriages. They may also be referred to as a railcar or railmotor, depending on country. Diesel-powered units may be further classified by their transmission type: diesel–electric (DEMU), diesel–mechanical (DMMU) or diesel–hydraulic (DHMU).\n\nThe diesel engine may be located above the frame in an engine bay or under the floor. Driving controls can be at both ends, on one end, or in a separate car.\n\nDMUs are usually classified by the method of transmitting motive power to their wheels.\n\nIn a diesel–mechanical multiple unit (DMMU) the rotating energy of the engine is transmitted via a gearbox and driveshaft directly to the wheels of the train, like a car. The transmissions can be shifted manually by the driver, as in the great majority of first-generation British Rail DMUs, but in most applications gears are changed automatically.\n\nIn a diesel–hydraulic multiple unit, a hydraulic torque converter, a type of fluid coupling, acts as the transmission medium for the motive power of the diesel engine to turn the wheels. Some units feature a hybrid mix of hydraulic and mechanical transmissions, usually reverting to the latter at higher operating speeds as this decreases engine RPM and noise.\n\nIn a diesel–electric multiple unit (DEMU) a diesel engine drives an electrical generator or an alternator which produces electrical energy. The generated current is then fed to electric traction motors on the wheels or bogies in the same way as a conventional diesel–electric locomotive.\n\nIn modern DEMUs, such as the Bombardier Voyager family, each car is entirely self-contained and has its own engine, generator and electric motors. In older designs, such as the British Rail Class 207, some cars within the consist may be entirely unpowered or only feature electric motors, obtaining electric current from other cars in the consist which have a generator and engine.\n\nA train composed of DMU cars scales well, as it allows extra passenger capacity to be added at the same time as motive power. It also permits passenger capacity to be matched to demand, and for trains to be split and joined en route. It is not necessary to match the power available to the size and weight of the train, as each unit is capable of moving itself. As units are added, the power available to move the train increases by the necessary amount. DMUs may have better acceleration capabilities, with more power-driven axles, making them more suitable for routes with frequent closely spaced stops, as compared with conventional locomotive and unpowered carriage setups.\n\nDistribution of the propulsion among the cars also results in a system that is less vulnerable to single-point-of-failure outages. Many classes of DMU are capable of operating with faulty units still in the consist. Because of the self-contained nature of diesel engines, there is no need to run overhead electric lines or electrified track, which can result in lower system construction costs.\n\nSuch advantages must be weighed against the underfloor noise and vibration that may be an issue with this type of train.\n\nGenerally Diesel traction has several downsides compared to electric traction, namely higher fuel costs, more noise and exhaust as well as worse acceleration and top speed performance. The power to weight ratio also tends to be worse.\n\nDMUs have further disadvantages compared to diesel locomotives in that they cannot be swapped out when passing onto an electrified line, necessitating either passengers to change trains or Diesel operation on electrified lines. Similarly the lost investment once electrification reduces the demand for diesel rolling stock is higher than with locomotive hauled trains where only the locomotive has to be replaced.\n\nIn the Republic of Ireland the Córas Iompair Éireann (CIÉ), which controlled the republic's railways between 1945 and 1986, introduced DMUs in the mid-1950s and they were the first diesel trains on many main lines.\n\nThe first significant use of DMUs in the United Kingdom was by the Great Western Railway, which introduced its small but successful series of diesel–mechanical GWR railcars in 1934. The LNER and London, Midland and Scottish Railway also experimented with DMUs in the 1930s, the LMS both on its own system, and on that of its Northern Irish subsidiary, but development was curtailed by World War II.\n\nAfter nationalisation, British Railways revived the concept in the early 1950s. At that time there was an urgent need to move away from expensive steam traction which led to many experimental designs using diesel propulsion and multiple units. The early DMUs proved successful, and under BR's 1955 Modernisation Plan the building of a large fleet was authorised. These BR \"First Generation\" DMUs were built between 1956 and 1963, and the Class 121 \"Bubble Car\" is still in service as of 2015.\n\nBR's owners, the British Government, required that contracts for the design and manufacture of new locomotives and rolling stock be split between numerous private firms as well as BR's own workshops, while different BR Regions laid down different specifications. The result was a multitude of different types, one of which was:\n\nIn 1960, British Railways introduced its Blue Pullman high-speed DEMUs.\nThese were few in number and relatively short-lived, but they paved the way for the very successful British Rail \"InterCity 125\" or High Speed Train (HST) units, which were built between 1975 and 1982 to take over most principal express services on non-electrified routes.\nThese trains run with a streamlined power car at each end and (typically) 7 to 9 intermediate trailer cars. Although originally classified as DEMUs, the trailer cars are very similar to loco-hauled stock, and the power cars were later reclassified as locomotives under Class 43. They remain in widespread use.\nBy the early 1980s, many of the surviving First Generation units were reaching the end of their design life, leading to spiralling maintenance costs, poor reliability and a poor public image for the railway. A stopgap solution was to convert some services back to locomotive haulage, as spare locomotives and hauled coaching stock were available, but this also increased operating costs. Commencing in the mid '80s, British Rail embarked upon its so called \"Sprinterisation\" programme, to replace most of the first generation DMUs and many locomotive-hauled trains with three new families of DMU:\nFollowing the impact of the privatisation of British Rail in the late 1990s, several other diesel–hydraulic DMU families have been introduced:\n\nDiesel multiple units are in constant use in Croatia, operated by national operator Croatian railways. On Croatian railways, DMU's have important role since they cover local, regional and distant lines across the country. Two largest towns in Croatia, Zagreb and Split, are daily connected with DMU titling trains \"RegioSwinger\" (Croatian series 7123) which provide inter city service between those two towns since 2004.\n\nIn the early 1990s, luxury DMU series 7021 (ordered for Yugoslav railways in 1970's, now scrapped) provided some of express or fast train lines across the country. DMU series HŽ series 7121 (renumbered leftover from former Yugoslav Railways), 7122 (ordered from Sweden in late 1990's) and later Croatian-built series 7022 and 7023 (prototype-remained) are nowadays in high use covering country's local and regional services, mostly in country's interior on the tracks that are not fully electrified.\n\nA type of Diesel Multiple Units in North America was the Budd Rail Diesel Car (RDC). The RDC was a single passenger car with two diesel engines and two sets of controls.\n\nCanada generally follows similar buffer strength requirements to the USA, but new services are evaluated on a case-by-case basis. As a result, several types of lightweight DMUs have been used:\n\n\nCosta Rica has purchased several Apolo 2400 series DMU railcars from the former narrow gauge operator in Spain, which are run in commuter service.\n\nIn the United States only FRA-compliant DMU systems are permitted on freight rail corridors. This is due to the Federal Railway Administration setting higher coupling strength requirements than European regulators, effectively prohibiting the use of lighter weight European-style inter-city rail DMUs on U.S. main line railways without timesharing with freight operations or special waivers from the FRA. This has greatly restricted the development of DMUs within the U.S. as no other country requires the much heavier FRA compliant vehicles, and no export market for them exists.\n\nOperations using FRA-compliant vehicles:\n\nOperations using non FRA-compliant vehicles:\n\nProposed operations:\n\nDMUs were first introduced to Australia in the late mid-20th century for use on quiet branch lines that could not justify a locomotive hauled service. Today, DMUs are widely used throughout Australia's southern states:\n\n\nIn Queensland, heritage DMUs are used on the Savannahlander and Gulflander tourist trains.\n\nChinese manufactured(CNR TANGSHAN) DEMU was introduced in Bangladesh in from May 25, 2013. DEMU is the country's first-ever commuter train service started its trial journey on Chittagong-Fouzdarhat route.\n\nState-owned company P.T. INKA builds several type of DMU, some of which operate in urban and suburban areas:\n\n\nIn Japan, where gasoline-driven railbuses (on small private lines) and railmotors (Kihani 5000 of the national railways) had been built since the 1920s, in 1937 the first two streamlined DMUs came in service, class Kiha 43000 (キハ43000系).\n\nThe service of several hundreds (in sum even thousands) of diesel railcars and DMUs started in 1950s following the improvement of fuel supply that was critical during World War II.\n\nThe Southrail or the South Main Line of the Philippine National Railways which travels South of the Luzon island is one of the oldest rail lines in Asia and in the world.\nThe Southrail of Philippine National Railways uses Hyundai Rotem DMUs together with second-hand DMUs from East Japan Railway Company or JR East. These are Kiha 52 and Kiha 59 which is also known as the \"Kogane\". Trains such as the Hyundai Rotem DMUs and Kiha 52 are often used for Metro Commuter Line services, while Kiha 59 is mostly used for Bicol interprovincial services and sometimes also for the Metro Commuter services.\n\nKorail operates many DMUs. The DHC (Diesel Hydraulic Car), which made its debut for the 1988 Seoul Olympics, can reach speeds up to and serves Saemaul-ho trains.\n\nIndian Railways operates DMUs in India.\n\nDMUs were first introduced to Sri Lanka in 1940. Aim of this was connecting minor railway stations and stops on the main line where most of express trains were not stopping.\n\nThe DMUs are now usually used on the Taiwan Railway Administration Hualien–Taitung Line, North-Link Line. DMUs in Taiwan are classified as Class DR.\n\nDMU manufacturers include:\n\n"}
{"id": "8843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8843", "title": "Donald A. Wollheim", "text": "Donald A. Wollheim\n\nDonald Allen Wollheim (October 1, 1914 – November 2, 1990) was an American science fiction editor, publisher, writer, and fan. As an author, he published under his own name as well as under pseudonyms, including David Grinnell.\n\nA founding member of the Futurians, he was a leading influence on science fiction development and fandom in the 20th century United States.\n\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" (first edition, 1979) calls Wollheim \"one of the first and most vociferous sf fans.\" He published numerous fanzines and co-edited the early \"Fanciful Tales of Space and Time\". His importance to early fandom is chronicled in the 1974 book \"The Immortal Storm\" by Sam Moskowitz and in the 1977 book \"The Futurians\" by Damon Knight.\n\nWollheim organized the first science fiction convention, when a group from New York met with a group from Philadelphia on October 22, 1936 in Philadelphia. The modern Philcon convention claims descent from this event. Out of this meeting, plans were formed for regional and national meetings, including the first Worldcon.\n\nWollheim was a member of the New York Science Fiction League, one of the clubs established by Hugo Gernsback to promote science fiction. When payment was not forthcoming for the first story he sold to Gernsback, Wollheim formed a group with several other authors, and successfully sued for payment. He was expelled from the Science Fiction League as \"a disruptive influence\" but was later reinstated. From the September 1935 issue of Gernsback's \"Wonder Stories\":\nIn 1937 Wollheim founded the Fantasy Amateur Press Association, whose first mailing (July 1937) included this statement from him: \"There are many fans desiring to put out a voice who dare not, for fear of being obliged to keep it up, and for the worry and time taken by subscriptions and advertising. It is for them and for the fan who admits it is his hobby and not his business that we formed the FAPA.\" In 1938, with several friends, he formed the Futurians—arguably the best-known of the science fiction clubs. At one time or another, the membership included Isaac Asimov, Frederik Pohl, Cyril Kornbluth, James Blish, John Michel, Judith Merril, Robert A. W. Lowndes, Richard Wilson, Damon Knight, Virginia Kidd, and Larry T. Shaw. In 1943 Wollheim married fellow Futurian Elsie Balter (1910–1996). It proved to be a lasting marriage and a publishing partnership.\n\nThe Futurians became less fan-oriented and more professional after 1940. Its conferences and workshops focused on writing, editing, and publishing, with many of its members interested in all three.\n\nWollheim's first story, \"The Man from Ariel\", was published in the January 1934 issue of \"Wonder Stories\" when he was nineteen. \nHe was not paid for the story, and when he learned that other authors had not been paid either, he said so in the \"Bulletin\" of the Terrestrial Fantascience Guild. Publisher Hugo Gernsback eventually settled with Wollheim and the other authors out of court for $75. However, when Wollheim submitted another story (\"The Space Lens\") under the pseudonym Millard Verne Gordon, he was once again cheated by Gernsback who published it in the September 1935 issue. His third known story was published in \"Fanciful Tales of Time and Space\", Fall 1936, a fanzine that he edited himself. That year he also published and edited another short-lived fanzine, \"Phantagraph\".\n\nWollheim's stories were published regularly from 1940; at the same time he was becoming an important editor. In the 1950s and 60s he wrote chiefly novels. He usually used pseudonyms for works aimed at grownups, and wrote children's novels under his own name. Notable and popular were the eight \"Mike Mars\" books for children, which explored different facets of the NASA space program. Also well-received were the \"Secret\" books for young readers: \"The Secret of Saturn's Rings\" (1954), \"Secret of the Martian Moons\" (1955), and \"The Secret of the Ninth Planet\" (1959). As Martin Pearson he published the \"Ajax Calkins\" series, which became the basis for his novel \"Destiny's Orbit\" (1962). A sequel, \"Destination: Saturn\" was published in 1967 in collaboration with Lin Carter. \"The Universe Makers\" (1971) is a discussion of themes and philosophy in science fiction.\n\nOne of Wollheim's short stories, \"Mimic\", was made into the feature film of the same name, released in 1997.\n\nHis daughter Elizabeth declared: \"In true editorial fashion, he was honest about the quality of his own writing. He felt it was fair to middling at best. He always knew that his great talent was as an editor.\"\n\nRobert Silverberg said that Donald Wollheim was \"one of the most significant figures in 20th century American science fiction publishing,\" adding, \"A plausible case could be made that he was \"the\" most significant figure — responsible in large measure for the development of the science fiction paperback, the science fiction anthology, and the whole post-Tolkien boom in fantasy fiction.\"\n\nIn late 1940, Wollheim noticed a new magazine titled \"Stirring Detective and Western Stories\" on the newsstands. He wrote to the publishers, Albing Publications, to see if they were interested in adding a science fiction title to their list, and he was invited to meet them. They did not have capital, however, and only guaranteed him a salary if the magazines were successful. He approached some of his fellow Futurians for free stories (some published under pseudonyms to protect their reputations with paying editors). It resulted in Wollheim's editing two of the earliest periodicals devoted to science fiction, the \"Cosmic Stories\" and \"Stirring Science Stories\" magazines starting in February 1941. After the magazines were cancelled later in 1941, Wollheim was able to find another publisher, Manhattan Fiction Publications, and a fourth issue of \"Stirring\" appeared, dated March 1942. Wartime constraints prevented ongoing publication, and there were no more issues of either title.\n\nWollheim edited the first science fiction anthology to be mass-marketed, \"The Pocket Book of Science Fiction\" (1943). It was also the first book containing the words \"science fiction\" in the title. It included works by Robert A. Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, T. S. Stribling, Stephen Vincent Benét, Ambrose Bierce, and H. G. Wells. In 1945 Wollheim edited the first hardcover anthology from a major publisher and the first omnibus, \"The Viking Portable Novels of Science\". He also edited the first anthology of original science fiction, \"The Girl With the Hungry Eyes\" (1947), although there is evidence that this last was originally intended to be the first issue of a new magazine.\n\nBetween 1947 and 1951 he was editor at the pioneering paperback publisher Avon Books, where he made available highly affordable editions of the works of A. Merritt, H. P. Lovecraft, and C. S. Lewis' \"Silent Planet\" space trilogy, bringing these previously little known authors a wide readership. During this period he also edited eighteen issues of the influential \"Avon Fantasy Reader\" as well as three of the \"Avon Science Fiction Reader\". These periodicals contained mostly reprints and a few original stories.\n\nIn 1952 Wollheim left Avon to work for A. A. Wyn at the Ace Magazine Company and spearheaded a new paperback book list, Ace Books. In 1953 he introduced science fiction to the Ace lineup, and for 20 years as editor-in-chief was responsible for their multi-genre list and, most important to him, their renowned sf list. Wollheim invented the \"Ace Doubles\" series which consisted of pairs of books, usually by different authors, bound back-to-back with two \"front\" covers. Because these paired books had to fit a fixed total page length, one or both were usually abridged to fit, and Wollheim often made other editorial alterations — as witness the differences between Poul Anderson's Ace novel \"War of the Wing-Men\" and its definitive revised edition, \"The Man Who Counts\". Among the authors who made their paperback debuts in Ace Doubles were Philip K. Dick, Samuel R. Delany, Leigh Brackett, Ursula K. Le Guin, and John Brunner. William S. Burroughs' first book, \"Junkie\", was published as an Ace Double. Wollheim also helped develop Marion Zimmer Bradley, Robert Silverberg, Avram Davidson, Fritz Leiber, Andre Norton, Thomas Burnett Swann, Jack Vance, and Roger Zelazny, among others. While at Ace, he and co-editor Terry Carr began an annual anthology series, \"The World's Best Science Fiction\", the first collection of what they considered the best of the prior year's short stories, from magazines, hardcovers, paperback collections and other anthologies.\n\nIn the early 1960s Ace reintroduced Edgar Rice Burroughs' work, which had long been out of print, and in 1965, Ace bought the paperback rights to \"Dune\". (Herbert's title worried Wollheim, who feared it would be mistaken for a western.) Eventually, Ace introduced single paperback books and became one of the preeminent genre publishers. Ace and Ballantine dominated sf in the 1960s and built the genre by publishing original material as well as reprints.\nBefore the 1960s, no American paperback publisher would publish fantasy. It was believed that there was no public for fantasy and that it would not sell. Wollheim changed the situation when he brought out an unauthorized paperback edition of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" in three volumes — the first mass-market paperback edition of Tolkien's epic. In a 2006 interview, his daughter Elizabeth said:\n\nTolkien had authorized a paperback edition of \"The Hobbit\" in 1961, though that edition was never made available outside the U.K. Eventually, he supported paperback editions of \"The Lord of the Rings\" and several of his other texts, but it is difficult to say whether he was persuaded to do so by the manifest economic wisdom evident in sales of the Ace editions. In any case, Ace was forced to cease publishing the unauthorized edition and to pay Tolkien for their sales following a grass-roots campaign by Tolkien's U.S. fans. A 1993 court determined that the copyright loophole suggested by Ace Books was invalid and its paperback edition was found to have been a violation of copyright under US law. (At this time, the U.S. had yet to join the International Copyright Convention, and most laws on the books existed to protect domestic creations from foreign infringement. Houghton Mifflin was technically in violation of the law when they exceeded their import limits and failed to renew their interim copyright.) In the \"Locus\" obituary for Donald Wollheim, however, more details emerge:\n\nWollheim left Ace in 1971. Frederik Pohl describes the circumstances:\nUnfortunately, when Wyn died [in 1968] the company was sold to a consortium headed by a bank. ... Few of them had any publishing experience before they found themselves running Ace. It showed. Before long, bills weren't being paid, authors' advances and royalties were delayed, budgets were cut back, and most of Donald's time was spent trying to soothe authors and agents who were indignant, and had every right to be, at the way they were treated.\n\nUpon leaving Ace, he and his wife, Elsie Balter Wollheim, founded DAW Books, named for his initials. DAW can claim to be the first mass market specialist science fiction and fantasy fiction publishing house. DAW issued its first four titles in April 1972. Most of the writers whom he had developed at Ace went with him to DAW: Marion Zimmer Bradley, Andre Norton, Philip K. Dick, John Brunner, A. Bertram Chandler, Kenneth Bulmer, Gordon R. Dickson, A. E. van Vogt, and Jack Vance. In later years, when his distributor, New American Library, threatened to withhold Thomas Burnett Swann's Biblical fantasy \"How Are the Mighty Fallen\" (1974) because of its homosexual content, Wollheim fought vigorously against their decision and they relented.\n\nHis later author discoveries included Tanith Lee, Jennifer Roberson, Michael Shea, Tad Williams, Celia S. Friedman, and C. J. Cherryh, whose \"Downbelow Station\" (1982) was the first DAW book to win the Hugo Award for best novel. He was also able to give a number of British writers — including E. C. Tubb, Brian Stableford, Barrington Bayley, and Michael Coney — a new American audience. He published translations of international sf as well as anthologies of translated stories, \"Best From the Rest of the World.\" With the help of Arthur W. Saha, Wollheim also edited and published the popular \"Annual World's Best Science Fiction\" anthology from 1971 until his death.\n\nUpon Wollheim's death in 1990, the prolific editor Robert Silverberg argued (above) that he may have been \"\"the\" most significant figure\" in American SF publishing.\n\nRobert Jordan credits Wollheim for helping to launch his (Jordan's) career. Wollheim made an offer for Jordan's first novel, \"Warriors of the Ataii\", though he withdrew the offer when Jordan requested some minor changes to the contract. Jordan claims that Wollheim's first, 'laudatory' letter convinced him that he could write, and so he chose to remember the first letter and forget about the second. The novel was never published, but Jordan went on to write the immensely successful \"Wheel of Time\" series for a different publisher.\n\nMarion Zimmer Bradley refers to him as \"a second father\", Frederik Pohl calls him \"a founder\", and Robert Silverberg says he was \"seriously underrated\" and \"one of the great shapers of science-fiction publishing in the United States\". In 1977 scholar Robert Scholes named Wollheim \"one of the most important editors and publishers of science fiction.\"\n\nFrom 1975 on, Wollheim received several special awards for his contributions to science fiction and to fantasy, including one at the 1975 World SF Convention and runner-up to Ian & Betty Ballantine at the 1975 World Fantasy Convention.\n\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2002, its seventh class of two deceased and two living persons. He is the third person inducted primarily for his work as editor or publisher, after the inaugural 1996 pair Hugo Gernsback and John W Campbell.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8844", "title": "Digital cinema", "text": "Digital cinema\n\nDigital cinema refers to the use of digital technology to distribute or project motion pictures as opposed to the historical use of reels of motion picture film, such as 35 mm film. Whereas film reels have to be shipped to movie theaters, a digital movie can be distributed to cinemas in a number of ways: over the Internet or dedicated satellite links, or by sending hard drives or optical discs such as Blu-ray discs. Digital movies are projected using a digital video projector instead of a film projector. Digital cinema is distinct from high-definition television and does not necessarily use traditional television or other traditional high-definition video standards, aspect ratios, or frame rates. In digital cinema, resolutions are represented by the horizontal pixel count, usually 2K (2048×1080 or 2.2 megapixels) or 4K (4096×2160 or 8.8 megapixels). As digital-cinema technology improved in the early 2010s, most of the theaters across the world converted to digital video projection.\n\nDigital media playback of high-resolution 2K files has at least a 20-year history. Early video data storage units (RAIDs) fed custom frame buffer systems with large memories. In early digital video units, content was usually restricted to several minutes of material. Transfer of content between remote locations was slow and had limited capacity. It was not until the late 1990s that feature-length films could be sent over the \"wire\" (Internet or dedicated fiber links). On October 23, 1998, Digital Light Processing (DLP) projector technology was publicly demonstrated with the release of \"The Last Broadcast\", the first feature-length movie, shot, edited and distributed digitally. In conjunction with Texas Instruments, the movie was publicly demonstrated in five theaters across the United States (Philadelphia, Portland (Oregon), Minneapolis, Providence, and Orlando).\n\nIn the United States, on June 18, 1999, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated on two screens in Los Angeles and New York for the release of Lucasfilm's \"Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace\". In Europe, on February 2, 2000, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated, by Philippe Binant, on one screen in Paris for the release of \"Toy Story 2\".\n\nOn January 19, 2000, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, in the United States, initiated the first standards group dedicated towards developing digital cinema. By December 2000, there were 15 digital cinema screens in the United States and Canada, 11 in Western Europe, 4 in Asia, and 1 in South America. Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI) was formed in March 2002 as a joint project of many motion picture studios (Disney, Fox, MGM, Paramount, Sony Pictures Entertainment, Universal and Warner Bros. Studios) to develop a system specification for digital cinema. In April 2004, in cooperation with the American Society of Cinematographers, DCI created standard evaluation material (the ASC/DCI StEM material) for testing of 2K and 4K playback and compression technologies. DCI selected JPEG2000 as the basis for the compression in the system the same year.\n\nIn China, in June 2005, an e-cinema system called \"dMs\" was established and was used in over 15,000 screens spread across China's 30 provinces. dMs estimated that the system would expand to 40,000 screens in 2009. In 2005 the UK Film Council Digital Screen Network launched in the UK by Arts Alliance Media creating a chain of 250 2K digital cinema systems. The roll-out was completed in 2006. This was the first mass roll-out in Europe. Axis IT/Christie Digital also started a roll-out in the United States and Canada. By mid 2006, about 400 theaters were equipped with 2K digital projectors with the number increasing every month. Several digital 3D films surfaced in 2006 and several prominent filmmakers committed to making their next productions in stereo 3D.\nVUE West End was one of the first 3D digital cinemas along with Odeon Printworks Manchester and VUE Cheshire Oaks with the RealD Inc. equipment installed. All sites supported at the time by Arts Alliance Media.In August 2006, the Malayalam digital movie \"Moonnamathoral\", produced by Mrs. Benzy Martin, was distributed via satellite to cinemas, thus becoming the first Indian digital cinema. This was done by Emil and Eric Digital Films, a company based at Thrissur using the end-to-end digital cinema system developed by Singapore-based DG2L Technologies.\n\nIn January 2007, \"Guru\" became the first Indian movie mastered in the DCI-compliant Jpeg2000 Interop format and also the first Indian film to be previewed digitally, internationally, at the Elgin Winter Garden in Toronto. This film was digitally mastered at Real Image Media Technologies in India. In 2007, the UK became home to Europe's first DCI-compliant fully digital multiplex cinemas; Odeon Hatfield and Odeon Surrey Quays (in London), with a total of 18 digital screens, were launched on 9 February 2007. By March 2007, with the release of Disney's \"Meet the Robinsons\", about 600 screens had been equipped with 2K digital projectors that used Real D Cinema's stereoscopic 3D technology, marketed under the Disney Digital 3-D brand. In June 2007, Arts Alliance Media announced the first European commercial digital cinema Virtual Print Fee (VPF) agreements (with Twentieth Century Fox and Universal Pictures). In March 2009 AMC Theatres announced that it closed a $315 million deal with Sony to replace all of its movie projectors with 4K digital projectors starting in the second quarter of 2009; it was anticipated that this replacement would be finished by 2012.\nBy June 2010, there were close to 16,000 digital cinema screens, with over 5000 of them being stereoscopic setups. David Hancock claims that the total number of digital screens worldwide was 36,242, up from 16,339 at end 2009 or a growth rate of 121.8 percent during the year. There were 10,083 d-screens in Europe as a whole (28.2 percent of global figure), 16,522 in the United States and Canada (46.2 percent of global figure) and 7,703 in Asia (21.6 percent of global figure). As regards digital 3D screens, there were a total of 21,936 3D screens, which equals 60.5 percent of all d-screens. This was a rise from the 55 percent in 2009 but is expected to drop slightly in 2011 to 57.5 percent. By the end of 2012, according to \"Screen Digest\", 91.4% of UK screens had been converted to digital and the rest expected to be so by the middle of 2013. Worldwide progress was slower as in some territories, particularly Latin America and Africa. However almost all screens worldwide were expected to be converted by the end of 2015. As of 31 March 2015, 38,719 screens (out of a total of 39,789 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital (15,643 of which are 3D capable), 3,007 screens in Canada have been converted (1,382 of which are 3D), and 93,147 screens internationally have been converted (59,350 of which are 3D). As of 3 May 2016, 98.2% of the world's cinema screens are now digitised.\n\nIn addition to the equipment already found in a film-based movie theatre (e.g., a sound reinforcement system, screen, etc.), a DCI-compliant digital cinema requires a digital projector and a powerful computer known as a \"server\". Movies are supplied to the theatre as a digital file called a Digital Cinema Package (DCP). For a typical feature film, this file will be anywhere between 90 GB and 300 GB of data (roughly two to six times the information of a Blu-ray disc) and may arrive as a physical delivery on a conventional computer hard drive or via satellite or fibre-optic broadband Internet. Currently (Dec 2013) physical deliveries of hard drives are most common and have become the industry standard. Promotional trailers arrive on a separate hard drive and range between 200 GB and 400 GB in size.\n\nRegardless of how the DCP arrives, it first needs to be copied onto the internal hard drives of the server, usually via a USB port, a process known as \"ingesting\". DCPs can be, and in the case of feature films almost always are, encrypted, to prevent illegal copying and piracy. The necessary decryption keys are supplied separately, usually as email attachments and then \"ingested\" via USB. Keys are time-limited and will expire after the end of the period for which the title has been booked. They are also locked to the hardware (server and projector) that is to screen the film, so if the theatre wishes to move the title to another screen or extend the run, a new key must be obtained from the distributor. Several versions of the same feature can be sent together. The original version (OV) is used as the basis of all the other playback options. Version files (VF) may have a different sound format (e.g. 7.1 as opposed to 5.1 surround sound) or subtitles. 2D and 3D versions are often distributed on the same hard drive.\n\nThe playback of the content is controlled by the server using a \"playlist\". As the name implies, this is a list of all the content that is to be played as part of the performance. The playlist will be created by a member of the theatre's staff using proprietary software that runs on the server. In addition to listing the content to be played the playlist also includes automation cues that allow the playlist to control the projector, the sound system, auditorium lighting, tab curtains and screen masking (if present), etc. The playlist can be started manually, by clicking the \"play\" button on the server's monitor screen, or automatically at pre-set times.\n\nDigital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a joint venture of the six major studios, published the first version (V1.0) of a system specification for digital cinema in July 2005. The main declared objectives of the specification were to define a digital cinema system that would \"\"present a theatrical experience that is better than what one could achieve now with a traditional 35mm Answer Print\"\", to provide global standards for interoperability such that any DCI-compliant content could play on any DCI-compliant hardware anywhere in the world and to provide robust protection for the intellectual property of the content providers. The DCI specification calls for picture encoding using the ISO/IEC 15444-1 \"JPEG2000\" (.j2c) standard and use of the CIE XYZ color space at 12 bits per component encoded with a 2.6 gamma applied at projection. Two levels of resolution for both content and projectors are supported: 2K (2048×1080) or 2.2 MP at 24 or 48 frames per second, and 4K (4096×2160) or 8.85 MP at 24 frames per second. The specification ensures that 2K content can play on 4K projectors and vice versa. Smaller resolutions in one direction are also supported (the image gets automatically centered). Later versions of the standard added additional playback rates (like 25 fps in SMPTE mode). For the sound component of the content the specification provides for up to 16 channels of uncompressed audio using the \"Broadcast Wave\" (.wav) format at 24 bits and 48 kHz or 96 kHz sampling.\n\nPlayback is controlled by an XML-format Composition Playlist, into an MXF-compliant file at a maximum data rate of 250 Mbit/s. Details about encryption, key management, and logging are all discussed in the specification as are the minimum specifications for the projectors employed including the color gamut, the contrast ratio and the brightness of the image. While much of the specification codifies work that had already been ongoing in the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE), the specification is important in establishing a content owner framework for the distribution and security of first-release motion-picture content. In addition to DCI's work, the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO) released its Digital Cinema System Requirements. The document addresses the requirements of digital cinema systems from the operational needs of the exhibitor, focusing on areas not addressed by DCI, including access for the visually impaired and hearing impaired, workflow inside the cinema, and equipment interoperability. In particular, NATO's document details requirements for the Theatre Management System (TMS), the governing software for digital cinema systems within a theatre complex, and provides direction for the development of security key management systems. As with DCI's document, NATO's document is also important to the SMPTE standards effort.\n\nThe Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) began work on standards for digital cinema in 2000. It was clear by that point in time that HDTV did not provide a sufficient technological basis for the foundation of digital cinema playback. In Europe, India and Japan however, there is still a significant presence of HDTV for theatrical presentations. Agreements within the ISO standards body have led to these non-compliant systems being referred to as Electronic Cinema Systems (E-Cinema).\n\nOnly four manufacturers make DCI-approved digital cinema projectors; these are Sony, Barco, Christie and NEC. Except for Sony, who use their own SXRD technology, all use the Digital Light Processing (DLP) technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI). Although D-Cinema projectors are similar in principle to digital projectors used in industry, education, and domestic home cinemas they differ in two important respects: first, they must conform to the strict performance requirements of the DCI specification; second, they must incorporate anti-piracy devices intended to protect the content copyright. For these reasons all projectors intended to be sold to theaters for screening current release movies \"must\" be approved by the DCI before being put on sale. They now pass through a process called CTP (compliance test plan). Because feature films in digital form are encrypted and the decryption keys (KDMs) are locked to the serial number of the server used (linking to both the projector serial number and server is planned in the future), a system will allow playback of a protected feature only with the required KDM.\n\nThree manufacturers have licensed the DLP Cinema technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI): Christie Digital Systems, Barco, and NEC. While NEC is a relative newcomer to Digital Cinema, Christie is the main player in the U.S. and Barco takes the lead in Europe and Asia. Initially DCI-compliant DLP projectors were available in 2K only, but from early 2012, when TI's 4K DLP chip went into full production, DLP projectors have been available in both 2K and 4K versions. Manufacturers of DLP-based cinema projectors can now also offer 4K upgrades to some of the more recent 2K models. Early DLP Cinema projectors, which were deployed primarily in the United States, used limited 1280×1024 resolution or the equivalent of 1.3 MP (megapixels). Digital Projection Incorporated (DPI) designed and sold a few DLP Cinema units (is8-2K) when TI's 2K technology debuted but then abandoned the D-Cinema market while continuing to offer DLP-based projectors for non-cinema purposes. Although based on the same 2K TI \"light engine\" as those of the major players they are so rare as to be virtually unknown in the industry. They are still widely used for pre-show advertising but not usually for feature presentations.\n\nTI's technology is based on the use of digital micromirror devices (DMDs). These devices are manufactured from silicon using similar technology to that of computer memory chips. The surface of these devices is covered by a very large number of microscopic mirrors, one for each pixel, so a 2K device has about 2.2 million mirrors and a 4K device about 8.8 million. Each mirror vibrates several thousand times a second between two positions: In one, light from the projector's lamp is reflected towards the screen, in the other away from it. The proportion of the time the mirror is in each position varies according to the required brightness of each pixel. Three DMD devices are used, one for each of the primary colors. Light from the lamp, usually a Xenon similar to those used in film projectors with a power between 1 kW and 7 kW, is split by colored filters into red, green and blue beams which are directed at the appropriate DMD. The 'forward' reflected beam from the three DMMDs is then re-combined and focused by the lens onto the cinema screen.\n\nAlone amongst the manufacturers of DCI-compliant cinema projectors Sony decided to develop its own technology rather than use TI's DLP technology. SXRD (Silicon X-tal (Crystal) Reflective Display) projectors have only ever been manufactured in 4K form and, until the launch of the 4K DLP chip by TI, Sony SXRD projectors were the only 4K DCI-compatible projectors on the market. Unlike DLP projectors, however, SXRD projectors do not present the left and right eye images of stereoscopic movies sequentially but use half the available area on the SXRD chip for each eye image. Thus during stereoscopic presentations the SXRD projector functions as a sub 2K projector, the same for HFR 3D Content.\n\nIn late 2005, interest in digital 3-D stereoscopic projection led to a new willingness on the part of theaters to co-operate in installing 2K stereo installations to show Disney's \"Chicken Little\" in 3-D film. Six more digital 3-D movies were released in 2006 and 2007 (including \"Beowulf\", \"Monster House\" and \"Meet the Robinsons\"). The technology combines a single digital projector fitted with either a polarizing filter (for use with polarized glasses and silver screens), a filter wheel or an emitter for LCD glasses. \"RealD\" uses a \"\"ZScreen\"\" for polarisation and MasterImage uses a filter wheel that changes the polarity of projector's light output several times per second to alternate quickly the left-and-right-eye views. Another system that uses a filter wheel is Dolby 3D. The wheel changes the wavelengths of the colours being displayed, and tinted glasses filter these changes so the incorrect wavelength cannot enter the wrong eye. \"XpanD\" makes use of an external emitter that sends a signal to the 3D glasses to block out the wrong image from the wrong eye.\n\nRGB laser projection for digital cinema : producing the purest colors and the brightest images.\n\nIn Asia, on July 13, 2017, an LED screen for digital cinema developed by Samsung Electronics was publicly demonstrated on one screen at Lotte Cinema World Tower in Seoul.\n\nDigital distribution of movies has the potential to save money for film distributors. To print an 80-minute feature film can cost US$1,500 to $2,500, so making thousands of prints for a wide-release movie can cost millions of dollars. In contrast, at the maximum 250 megabit-per-second data rate (as defined by DCI for digital cinema), a feature-length movie can be stored on an off-the-shelf 300 GB hard drive for $50 and a broad release of 4000 'digital prints' might cost $200,000. In addition hard drives can be returned to distributors for reuse. With several hundred movies distributed every year, the industry saves billions of dollars. The digital-cinema roll-out was stalled by the slow pace at which exhibitors acquired digital projectors, since the savings would be seen not by themselves but by distribution companies. The Virtual Print Fee model was created to address this by passing some of the saving on to the cinemas. As a consequence of the rapid conversion to digital projection, the number of theatrical releases exhibited on film is dwindling. As of 4 May 2014, 37,711 screens (out of a total of 40,048 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital, 3,013 screens in Canada have been converted, and 79,043 screens internationally have been converted.\n\nRealization and demonstration, on October 29, 2001, of the first digital cinema transmission by satellite in Europe of a feature film by Bernard Pauchon and Philippe Binant.\n\nDigital cinemas can deliver live broadcasts from performances or events. This began initially with live broadcasts from the New York Metropolian Opera delivering regular live broadcasts into cinemas and has been widely imitated ever since. Leading territories providing the content are the UK, the USA, France and Germany. The Royal Opera House, Sydney Opera House, English National Opera and others have found new and returning audiences captivated by the detail offered by a live digital broadcast featuring handheld and cameras on cranes positioned throughout the venue to capture the emotion that might be missed in a live venue situation. In addition these providers all offer additional value during the intervals e.g. interviews with choreographers, cast members, a backstage tour which would not be on offer at the live event itself. Other live events in this field include live theatre from NT Live, Branagh Live, Royal Shakespeare Company, Shakespeare's Globe, the Royal Ballet, Mariinsky Ballet, the Bolshoi Ballet and the Berlin Philharmoniker.\n\nIn the last 10 years this initial offering of the arts has also expanded to include live and recorded music events such as Take That Live, One Direction Live, Andre Rieu, live musicals such as the recent Miss Saigon and a record-breaking Billy Elliot Live In Cinemas. Live sport, documentary with a live question and answer element such as the recent Oasis documentary, lectures, faith broadcasts, stand up comedy, museum and gallery exhibitions, TV specials such as the record-breaking \"Doctor Who\" fiftieth anniversary special \"The Day Of The Doctor\", have all contributed to creating a valuable revenue stream for cinemas large and small all over the world. Subsequently, live broadcasting, formerly known as Alternative Content, has become known as Event Cinema and a trade association now exists to that end. Ten years on the sector has become a sizeable revenue stream in its own right, earning a loyal following amongst fans of the arts, and the content limited only by the imagination of the producers it would seem. Theatre, ballet, sport, exhibitions, TV specials and documentaries are now established forms of Event Cinema. Worldwide estimations put the likely value of the Event Cinema industry at $1bn by 2019.\n\nEvent Cinema currently accounts for on average between 1-3% of overall box office for cinemas worldwide but anecdotally it's been reported that some cinemas attribute as much as 25%, 48% and even 51% (the Rio Bio cinema in Stockholm) of their overall box office. It is envisaged ultimately that Event Cinema will account for around 5% of the overall box office globally. Event CInema saw 6 worldwide records set and broken over from 2013-15 with notable successes Dr Who ($10.2m in 3 days at the box office - event was also broadcast on terrestrial TV simultaneously), Pompeii Live by the British Museum, Billy Elliot, Andre Rieu, One Direction, Richard III by the Royal Shakespeare Company.\n\nEvent Cinema is defined more by the frequency of events rather than by the content itself. Event Cinema events typically appear in cinemas during traditionally quieter times in the cinema week such as the Monday-Thursday daytime/evening slot and are characterised by the One Night Only release, followed by one or possibly more 'Encore' releases a few days or weeks later if the event is successful and sold out. On occasion more successful events have returned to cinemas some months or even years later in the case of NT Live where the audience loyalty and company branding is so strong the content owner can be assured of a good showing at the box office.\n\nThe digital formation of sets and locations, especially in the time of growing film series and sequels, is that virtual sets, once computer generated and stored, can be easily revived for future films.\nConsidering digital film images are documented as data files on hard disk or flash memory, varying systems of edits can be executed with the alteration of a few settings on the editing console with the structure being composed virtually in the computer's memory. A broad choice of effects can be sampled simply and rapidly, without the physical constraints posed by traditional cut-and-stick editing. Digital cinema allows national cinemas to construct films specific to their cultures in ways that the more constricting configurations and economics of customary film-making prevented. Low-cost cameras and computer-based editing software have gradually enabled films to be produced for minimal cost. The ability of digital cameras to allow film-makers to shoot limitless footage without wasting pricey celluloid has transformed film production in some Third World countries. From consumers' perspective digital prints don't deteriorate with the number of showings. Unlike celluloid film, there is no projection mechanism or manual handling to add scratches or other physically generated artefacts. Provincial cinemas that would have received old prints can give consumers the same cinematographic experience (all other things being equal) as those attending the premiere.\n\nA number of high-profile film directors, including Christopher Nolan, Paul Thomas Anderson, David O. Russell and Quentin Tarantino have publicly criticized digital cinema and advocated the use of film and film prints. Most famously, Tarantino has suggested he may retire because, though he can still shoot on film, because of the rapid conversion to digital, he cannot project from 35 mm prints in the majority of American cinemas. Steven Spielberg has stated that though digital projection produces a much better image than film if originally shot in digital, it is \"inferior\" when it has been converted to digital. He attempted at one stage to release \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" solely on film. Paul Thomas Anderson recently was able to create 70-mm film prints for his film \"The Master\" .\n\nFilm critic Roger Ebert criticized the use of DCPs after a cancelled film festival screening of Brian DePalma's film \"Passion\" at New York Film Festival as a result of a lockup due to the coding system.\n\nThe theoretical resolution of 35 mm film is greater than that of 2K digital cinema. 2K resolution (2048×1080) is also only slightly greater than that of consumer based 1080p HD (1920x1080). However, since digital post-production techniques became the standard in the early 2000s, the majority of movies, whether photographed digitally or on 35 mm film, have been mastered and edited at the 2K resolution. Moreover, 4K post production is becoming more common (Dec 2013). As projectors are replaced with 4K models the difference in resolution between digital and 35 mm film is somewhat reduced. Digital cinema servers utilize far greater bandwidth over domestic \"HD\", allowing for a difference in quality (e.g., Blu-ray colour encoding 4:2:0 48Mbit/s MAX datarate, DCI D-Cinema 4:4:4 250Mbit/s 2D/3D, 500Mbit/s HFR3D). Each pixel has greater detail per frame.\n\nOwing to the smaller dynamic range of digital cameras, correcting poor digital exposures is more difficult than correcting poor film exposures during post-production. A partial solution to this problem is to add complex video-assist technology during the shooting process. However, such technologies are typically available only to high-budget production companies. Digital cinemas' efficiency of storing images has a downside. The speed and ease of modern digital editing processes threatens to give editors and their directors, if not an embarrassment of choice then at least a confusion of options, potentially making the editing process, with this 'try it and see' philosophy, lengthier rather than shorter. Because the equipment needed to produce digital feature films can be obtained more easily than celluloid, producers could inundate the market with cheap productions and potentially dominate the efforts of serious directors. Because of the quick speed in which they are filmed, these stories sometimes lack essential narrative structure.\n\nThe projectors used for celluloid film were largely the same technology as when film/movies were invented over 100 years ago. The evolutions of adding sound and wide screen could largely be accommodated by bolting on sound decoders, and changing lenses. This well proven and understood technology had several advantages 1) The life of a mechanical projector of around 35 years 2) a mean time between failures (MTBF) of 15 years and 3) an average repair time of 15 minutes (often done by the projectionist). On the other hand, digital projectors are around 10 times more expensive, have a much shorter life expectancy due to the developing technology (already technology has moved from 2K to 4K) so the pace of obsolescence is higher. The MTBF has not yet been established, but the ability for the projectionist to effect a quick repair has gone.\n\nThe electronic transferring of digital film, from central servers to servers in cinema projection booths, is an inexpensive process of supplying copies of newest releases to the vast number of cinema screens demanded by prevailing saturation-release strategies. There is a significant saving on print expenses in such cases: at a minimum cost per print of $1200–2000, the cost of celluloid print production is between $5–8 million per film. With several thousand releases a year, the probable savings offered by digital distribution and projection are over $1 billion. The cost savings and ease, together with the ability to store film rather than having to send a print on to the next cinema, allows a larger scope of films to be screened and watched by the public; minority and small-budget films that would not otherwise get such a chance.\n\nThe initial costs for converting theaters to digital are high: $100,000 per screen, on average. Theaters have been reluctant to switch without a cost-sharing arrangement with film distributors. A solution is a temporary \"Virtual Print Fee\" system, where the distributor (who saves the money of producing and transporting a film print) pays a fee per copy to help finance the digital systems of the theaters. A theater can purchase a film projector for as little as $10,000 (though projectors intended for commercial cinemas cost two to three times that; to which must be added the cost of a long-play system, which also costs around $10,000, making a total of around $30,000–$40,000) from which they could expect an average life of 30–40 years. By contrast, a digital cinema playback system—including server, media block, and projector—can cost two to three times as much, and would have a greater risk of component failure and obsolescence. (In Britain the cost of an entry level projector including server, installation, etc., would be £31,000 [$50,000].)\n\nArchiving digital masters has also turned out to be both tricky and costly. In a 2007 study, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences found the cost of long-term storage of 4K digital masters to be \"enormously higher—up to 11 times that of the cost of storing film masters.\" This is because of the limited or uncertain lifespan of digital storage: No current digital medium—be it optical disc, magnetic hard drive or digital tape—can reliably store a motion picture for as long as a hundred years or more (something that film—properly stored and handled—does very well). The short history of digital storage media has been one of innovation and, therefore, of obsolescence. Archived digital content must be periodically removed from obsolete physical media to up-to-date media. The expense of digital image capture is not necessarily less than the capture of images onto film; indeed, it is sometimes greater.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8845", "title": "Democratic Progressive Party", "text": "Democratic Progressive Party\n\nThe Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is a liberal political party (centrism, anti-communism) in Taiwan, and the dominant party in the Pan-Green Coalition. It is currently the majority ruling party, controlling both the presidency and the unicameral Legislative Yuan.\n\nFounded in 1986, the DPP is one of two major parties in Taiwan, along with the historically dominant Kuomintang. It has traditionally been associated with strong advocacy of human rights and a distinct Taiwanese identity. The current leader is President Tsai Ing-wen, the second member of the DPP to hold the office. The DPP is a long-term member of Liberal International and a founding member of the Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats. It represented Taiwan in the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organisation. The DPP and its affiliated parties are widely classified as socially liberal because of their strong support for human rights, but they also advocate economic liberalism and a nationalistic identity; the DPP is also more willing to increase military expenditures compared to the KMT.\n\nThe DPP's roots were in opposition to Kuomintang one-party authoritarian rule. It was founded as the Tangwai – or \"outside-the-KMT\" – movement. This movement culminated in the formation of the DPP as an alternative party on September 28, 1986 when eighteen founding members met at Grand Hotel Taipei. A total of 132 people joined the party that day. The new party contested the 1986 election even though competing parties remained illegal under national law until the next year. The first members of the party drew heavily from the ranks of family members and defense lawyers of political prisoners as well as intellectuals and artists who had spent time abroad. Such individuals were strongly committed to political change that would ensure constitutional support in Taiwan for freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association. The party did not at the outset give open support to an independent Taiwanese national identity–a move that could have invited a violent crackdown by the Taiwan's Kuomintang rulers. Its platform was pro-environment and pro-democracy. As more and more of its demands were met during the 1990s–such as the direct popular election of Taiwan's president and all representatives in its Legislative Yuan, and open discussion of Taiwan's repressive past as represented in the February 28 Incident and its long martial law aftermath–a greater variety of views could be advocated in the more liberal political atmosphere. Party members began openly promoting a national identity for Taiwan separate from that of China. The DPP supported reform of the Constitution that would make it official that Taiwan's national government represented only the people of Taiwan and made no claims to territory in mainland China or Mongolia.\n\nOnce the DPP had representation in the Legislative Yuan (LY, or Parliament), the party used the legislature as a forum to challenge the government. However, it did not emerge as a formidable force until 1991, when the elderly LY members elected from the mainland provinces in 1948 retired. Fears that the DPP would one day take control of the legislature led then-President Lee Teng-hui to push through a series of amendments to strengthen presidential power (for example, Taiwan's premier would no longer have to be confirmed by the Legislative Yuan).\n\nThe DPP won the presidency with the election of Chen Shui-bian in March 2000 with a plurality, due to Pan-Blue voters splitting their vote between the Kuomintang and independent candidate James Soong, ending more than half a century of KMT rule in Taiwan. Chen softened the party's stance on independence to appeal to moderate voters, appease the United States and placate China. He also promised not to change the ROC state symbols or declare formal independence as long as the People's Republic of China did not attack Taiwan.\n\nThe DPP became the largest party having reached a plurality in the Legislative Yuan for the first time in 2002 following the 2001 legislative election. However, a majority coalition between the KMT, People First Party, and New Party prevented it from taking control of the chamber.\n\nIn 2004, President Chen Shui-bian was re-elected by a narrow margin. He and Vice President Annette Lu had been involved in an assassination attempt only hours before the election. The KMT candidate, Lien Chan, demanded a recount the following morning. A judicial recount under the jurisdiction of a special panel of the High Court began on 10 May 2004 and ended on 18 May 2004. It was conducted by about 460 teams situated in 21 courthouses across the Taiwan area. Each team had seven members – one judge, two members each from the district court and the local government election authorities and two witnesses each representing the plaintiff (Pan-Blue Coalition) and the defendant (Pan-Green Coalition). Disputed votes were sent to High Court in Taipei for verification. After the recount, President Chen was confirmed the winner of the election by a smaller margin (25,563 as opposed to 29,518 originally). In the later legislative election, the Pan-Blue Coalition opposition retained control of the chamber.\n\nThe DPP suffered a significant election defeat in nationwide local and county elections in December 2005. The pan-blue coalition captured 16 of 23 county and city government offices under the leadership of popular Taipei mayor and KMT Party Chairman Ma Ying-jeou.\n\nThe results led to a shake up of the party leadership. Su Tseng-chang resigned as DPP chairman soon after election results were announced. Su had pledged to step down if the DPP lost either Taipei County or failed to win 10 of the 23 mayor/magistrate positions. Vice President Annette Lu was appointed acting DPP leader. Presidential Office Secretary-General Yu Shyi-kun was elected in a three-way race against legislator Chai Trong-rong and Wong Chin-chu with 54.4% of the vote.\n\nPremier Frank Hsieh, DPP election organizer and former mayor of Kaohsiung twice tendered a verbal resignation immediately following the election, but his resignation was not accepted by President Chen until January 17, 2006 after the DPP chairmanship election had concluded. The former DPP Chairman Su Tseng-chang was appointed to replace Hsieh as premier. Hsieh and his cabinet resigned en masse on January 24 to make way for Su and his new cabinet. President Chen had offered the position of Presidential Office Secretary-General (vacated by Su) to the departing premier, but Hsieh declined and left office criticizing President Chen for his tough line on dealing with China.\n\nOn September 30, 2007, Taiwan's ruling Democratic Progressive Party approved a resolution asserting a separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a \"normal nation\". It struck an accommodating tone by advocating general use of \"Taiwan\" as the country's name without calling for abandonment of the name Republic of China.\n\nIn the national elections held in early months of 2008 the DPP won less than 25% of the seats (38.2% vote share) in the new Legislative Yuan while its presidential candidate, former Kaohsiung mayor Frank Hsieh, lost to KMT candidate Ma Ying-jeou by a wide margin (41.55% vs. 58.45%).\n\nThe first months after the election were dominated by press coverage of the travails of Chen Shui-bian and his wife Wu Shu-jen. On August 15, 2008 Chen resigned from the Democratic Progressive Party and apologized thus: \"Today I have to say sorry to all of the DPP members and supporters. I let everyone down, caused you humiliation and failed to meet your expectations. My acts have caused irreparable damage to the party. I love the DPP deeply and am proud of being a DPP member. To express my deepest regrets to all DPP members and supporters, I announce my withdrawal from the DPP immediately. My wife Wu Shu-jen is also withdrawing from the party.\" DPP Chairwoman Tsai Ing-wen followed with a public statement on behalf of the party: \"In regard to Chen and his wife's decision to withdraw from the party and his desire to shoulder responsibility for his actions as well as to undergo an investigation by the party's anti-corruption committee, we respect his decision and accept it.\"\n\nThe DPP vowed to reflect on public misgivings towards the party. Chairwoman Tsai insisted on the need for the party to remember its history, defend Taiwan's sovereignty and national security, and maintain its confidence.\n\nThe party re-emerged as a voice in Taiwan's political debate when Ma's administration reached the end of its first year in office. The DPP marked the anniversary with massive rallies in Taipei and Kaohsiung. Tsai's address to the crowd in Taipei on May 17 proclaimed a \"citizens' movement to protect Taiwan\" seeking to \"protect our democracy and protect Taiwan.\"\n\nOn January 16, 2016, Taiwan held a general election for its presidency and for the Legislative Yuan. The DPP gained the presidential seat, with the election of Tsai Ing-wen, who received 56.12% of the votes, while her opponent Eric Chu gained 31.2%. In addition, the DPP gained a majority of the Legislative Yuan, winning 68 seats in the 113-seat legislature, up from 40 in 2012 election, thus giving them a majority (along with a coalition with the New Power Party).\n\nPrograms supported by the DPP include moderate social welfare policies involving the rights of women, senior citizens, children, young people, labour, minorities, indigenous peoples, farmers, and other disadvantaged sectors of the society. Furthermore, its platform includes a legal and political order based on human rights and democracy; balanced economic and financial administration; fair and open social welfare; educational and cultural reform; independent defence and peaceful foreign policy. For these reasons, it used to be considered a party of the centre-left, economically, and its base consisted largely of the working class.\n\nThe primary political axis in Taiwan involves the issue of Taiwan independence versus eventual unification with China. Although the differences tend to be portrayed in polarized terms, both major coalitions have developed modified, nuanced and often complex positions. Though opposed in the philosophical origins, the practical differences between such positions can sometimes be subtle.\n\nThe current official position of the party is that the \"Republic of China (Taiwan)\" is an independent and sovereign country whose territory consists of Taiwan and its surrounding smaller islands and whose sovereignty derives only from the ROC citizens living in Taiwan (similar philosophy of self-determination), based on the \"Resolution on Taiwan's Future\" in 1999. It considers Taiwan independence to be a current fact making a formal declaration of independence unnecessary. The DPP rejects the so-called \"One China principle\" defined in 1992 as the basis for official diplomatic relations with the mainland China (PRC) and advocates a Taiwanese national identity which is separate from mainland China. The DPP argues that its efforts to promote a Taiwanese national identity are merely an effort to normalize a Taiwanese identity repressed during years of authoritarian Kuomintang rule. Democratic Progressive Party also differs from the KMT on foreign and defense policies in that the DPP considers relations with the United States, Japan, and European states, among other democratic countries, are crucial for Taiwan's security.\n\nIn contrast, the KMT or pan-blue coalition agrees that the Republic of China is an independent and sovereign country that is not part of the PRC, but argues that a one China principle (with different definitions across the strait) can be used as the basis for talks with China. The KMT also opposes the purposes of Taiwan independence and argues that efforts to establish a Taiwanese national identity separated from the Chinese national identity are unnecessary and needlessly provocative. Some KMT conservative officials have called efforts from DPP \"anti-China\" and \"racist\" (e.g., opposing the immigrants from mainland China, whom DPP officials did not recognize as Taiwanese, but Chinese). At the other end of the political spectrum, the acceptance by the DPP of the symbols of the Republic of China is opposed by the Taiwan Solidarity Union.\n\nThe first years of the DPP as the ruling party drew accusations from the opposition that, as a self-styled Taiwanese nationalist party, the DPP was itself inadequately sensitive to the ethnographic diversity of Taiwan's population. Where the KMT had been guilty of Chinese chauvinism, the critics charged, the DPP might offer nothing more as a remedy than Hoklo chauvinism.\n\nChina has maintained a hostile position toward the DPP. It has made some efforts to moderate its tone since passing its Anti-Secession Law in 2005 to prevent a popular backlash from Taiwan's voters. In 2008 China stated it was willing to negotiate with any party in Taiwan that \"accepts the so-called 1992 consensus\" (The consensus agreed by KMT and CPC, which KMT described as one China principle with different definitions across the strait, CPC first recognized until 2008).\n\nThe deep-rooted hostility between Taiwanese aborigines and (Taiwanese) Hoklo, and the Aboriginal communities effective KMT networks contribute to Aboriginal skepticism against the DPP and the Aboriginals tendency to vote for the KMT.\n\nAboriginals have criticized politicians for abusing the \"indigenization\" movement for political gains, such as aboriginal opposition to the DPP's \"rectification\" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou. The Atayal and Seediq slammed the Truku for their name rectification.\n\nBut since 2016,more and more Aboriginals started to vote for the DPP instead of the KMT.\n\nThe National Party Congress selects, for two year terms, the 30 members of the Central Executive Committee and the 11 members of the Central Review Committee. The Central Executive Committee, in turn, chooses the 10 members of the Central Standing Committee. The DPP since 2012 also has a \"China Affairs Committee\" to deal with Cross-Strait relations; the name caused some controversy within the party and in the Taiwan media, with critics suggesting that \"Mainland Affairs Committee\" or \"Cross-Strait Affairs Committee\" would show less of a hostile \"One Country on Each Side\" attitude.\n\nFor many years the Democratic Progressive Party officially recognized several factions within its membership, such as the New Tide faction (新潮流系), the Formosa faction (美麗島系), the Justice Alliance faction (正義連線系) and Welfare State Alliance faction (福利國系). Each faction endorsed slightly different policies. The factions were often generationally identifiable, representing individuals who had entered the party at different times. In 2006 the party ended recognition of factions. The factions have since stated that they will comply with the resolution. However, the factions are still referred to by name in the national media.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8846", "title": "Datura", "text": "Datura\n\nDatura is a genus of nine species of poisonous vespertine flowering plants belonging to the family Solanaceae. They are commonly known as daturas, but also known as devil's trumpets, not to be confused with angel's trumpets, its closely related genus \"Brugmansia\". They are also sometimes called moonflowers, jimsonweed, devil's weed, hell's bells, thorn-apple, and many more. Its precise and natural distribution is uncertain, owing to its extensive cultivation and naturalization throughout the temperate and tropical regions of the globe. Its distribution within the Americas and North Africa, however, is most likely restricted to the United States and Mexico and Southern Canada in North America, and Tunisia in Africa, where the highest species diversity occurs.\n\nAll species of \"Datura\" are poisonous, especially their seeds and flowers.\n\nSome South American plants formerly thought of as \"Datura\" are now treated as belonging to the distinct genus \"Brugmansia\" (\"Brugmansia\" differs from \"Datura\" in that it is woody, making shrubs or small trees, and it has pendulous flowers, rather than erect ones). Other related taxa include \"Hyosyamus niger\", \"Atropa belladonna\", \"Mandragora officinarum\", and many more.\n\nThe name \"Datura\" is taken from Hindi धतूरा ' 'thorn-apple', ultimately from Sanskrit धत्तूर ' 'white thorn-apple' (referring to \"Datura metel\" of Asia). In the Ayurvedic text Sushruta different species of Datura are also referred to as ' and '. Dhatura is offered to Lord Shiva in Hindu/Santana religion. Record of this name in English dates back to 1662. Nathaniel Hawthorne refers to one type in \"The Scarlet Letter\" as \"apple-Peru\". In Mexico, its common name is \"toloache\".\n\n\"Datura\" species are herbaceous, leafy annuals and short-lived perennials which can reach up to 2 m in height. The leaves are alternate, 10–20 cm long and 5–18 cm broad, with a lobed or toothed margin. The flowers are erect or spreading (not pendulous like those of \"Brugmansia\"), trumpet-shaped, 5–20 cm long and 4–12 cm broad at the mouth; colors vary from white to yellow, pink, and pale purple. The fruit is a spiny capsule 4–10 cm long and 2–6 cm broad, splitting open when ripe to release the numerous seeds. The seeds disperse freely over pastures, fields and even wasteland locations.\n\n\"Datura\" belongs to the classic \"witches' weeds\", along with deadly nightshade, henbane, and mandrake. Most parts of the plants are toxic, and datura has a long history of use for causing delirious states and death. It was well known as an essential ingredient of potions and witches' brews.\n\nIn India it has been referred to as \"Poisonous\" and as an aphrodisiac. In little measures it was used in Ayurveda as a medicine from the ancient times. It is used in rituals and prayers to Shiva. It is also used in Ganesh Chaturthi.\n\nThe larvae of some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species, including \"Hypercompe indecisa\", eat some \"Datura\" species.\n\nIt is difficult to classify \"Datura\" as to its species, and it often happens that the descriptions of new species are accepted prematurely. Later, these \"new species\" are found to be simply varieties that have evolved due to conditions at a specific location. They usually disappear in a few years. Contributing to the confusion is the fact that various species, such as \"D. wrightii\" and \"D. inoxia\", are very similar in appearance, and the variation within a species can be extreme. For example, \"Datura\" species can change size of plant, leaf, and flowers, all depending on location. The same species, when growing in a half-shady, damp location can develop into a flowering bush half as tall as an adult human of average height, but when growing in a very dry location, will only grow into a thin plant not much more than ankle-high, with tiny flowers and a few miniature leaves.\n\nToday, experts classify only nine species of \"Datura\":\n\n\nAmerican Brugmansia and Datura Society, Inc. (ABADS) is designated in the 2004 edition of the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants as the official International Cultivar Registration Authority for \"Datura\". This role was delegated to ABADS by the International Society for Horticultural Science in 2002.\n\n\n\"Datura\" species are usually planted annually from the seed produced in the spiny pods, but with care, plants can be overwintered. Most species are suited to being planted outside or in containers. As a rule, they need warm, sunny places and soil that will keep their roots dry. When grown outdoors in good locations, the plants tend to reseed themselves and may become invasive. In containers, they should have porous, aerated potting soil with adequate drainage. The plants are susceptible to fungi in the root area, so anaerobic organic enrichment such as anaerobically composted organic matter or manure, should be avoided.\n\nAll \"Datura\" plants contain tropane alkaloids such as scopolamine, hyoscyamine, and atropine, primarily in their seeds and flowers. Because of the presence of these substances, \"Datura\" has been used for centuries in some cultures as a poison. There can be a 5:1 toxin variation between plants, and a given plant's toxicity depends on its age, where it is growing, and the local weather conditions. These variations makes \"Datura\" exceptionally hazardous as a drug.\n\nIn traditional cultures, a great deal of experience with and detailed knowledge of \"Datura\" was critical to minimize harm. Many tragic incidents result from modern users ingesting \"Datura\". For example, in the 1990s and 2000s, the United States media contained stories of adolescents and young adults dying or becoming seriously ill from intentionally ingesting \"Datura\". There are also several reports in the medical literature of deaths from \"D. stramonium\" and \"D. ferox\" intoxication. Children are especially vulnerable to atropine poisoning.\n\n\"Datura\" toxins may be ingested accidentally by consumption of honey produced by several wasp species, including \"Brachygastra lecheguana\", during the \"Datura\" blooming season. It appears that these semi-domesticated honey wasps collect \"Datura\" nectar for honey production which can lead to poisoning.\n\nIn some parts of Europe and India, \"Datura\" has been a popular poison for suicide and murder. From 1950 to 1965, the State Chemical Laboratories in Agra, India, investigated 2,778 deaths caused by ingesting \"Datura.\"\n\nThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported accidental poisoning resulting in hospitalization for a family of six who inadvertently ingested \"Datura\" used as an ingredient in stew.\n\nIn some places, it is prohibited to buy, sell, or cultivate \"Datura\" plants.\n\nDue to the potent combination of anticholinergic substances it contains, \"Datura\" intoxication typically produces effects similar to that of an anticholinergic delirium (usually involving a complete inability to differentiate reality from fantasy); hyperthermia; tachycardia; bizarre, and possibly violent behavior; and severe mydriasis (dilated pupils) with resultant painful photophobia that can last several days. Pronounced amnesia is another commonly reported effect.\n\nIn \"Pharmacology and Abuse of Cocaine, Amphetamines, Ecstasy and Related Designer Drugs\", Freye asserts:\nFew substances have received as many severely negative recreational experience reports as has \"Datura\". The overwhelming majority of those who describe their use of \"Datura\" find their experiences extremely unpleasant both mentally and often physically dangerous. However, anthropologists have found that indigenous groups, with a great deal of experience with and detailed knowledge of \"Datura\", have been known to use Datura spiritually (including the Navajo and especially the Havasupai). The knowledge of Datura's properties was critical to minimize harm.\n\nDue to their agitated behavior and confused mental state, victims of \"Datura\" poisoning are typically hospitalized. Gastric lavage and the administration of activated charcoal can be used to reduce the stomach's absorption of the ingested material. The drug physostigmine is used to reverse the effect of the poisons. Benzodiazepines can be given to curb the patient's agitation, and supportive care with oxygen, hydration, and symptomatic treatment is often provided. Observation of the patient is indicated until the symptoms resolve, usually from 24–36 hours after ingestion of the \"Datura\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8847", "title": "Commutator subgroup", "text": "Commutator subgroup\n\nIn mathematics, more specifically in abstract algebra, the commutator subgroup or derived subgroup of a group is the subgroup generated by all the commutators of the group.\n\nThe commutator subgroup is important because it is the smallest normal subgroup such that the quotient group of the original group by this subgroup is abelian. In other words, \"G\"/\"N\" is abelian if and only if \"N\" contains the commutator subgroup. So in some sense it provides a measure of how far the group is from being abelian; the larger the commutator subgroup is, the \"less abelian\" the group is.\n\nFor elements \"g\" and \"h\" of a group \"G\", the commutator of \"g\" and \"h\" is formula_1 (or formula_2). The commutator formula_3 is equal to the identity element \"e\" if and only if formula_4 , that is, if and only if \"g\" and \"h\" commute. In general, formula_5 (or, respectively, formula_6).\n\nAn element of \"G\" which is of the form formula_3 for some \"g\" and \"h\" is called a commutator. The identity element \"e\" = [\"e\",\"e\"] is always a commutator, and it is the only commutator if and only if \"G\" is abelian.\n\nHere are some simple but useful commutator identities, true for any elements \"s\", \"g\", \"h\" of a group \"G\":\n\n\nThe first and second identities imply that the set of commutators in \"G\" is closed under inversion and conjugation. If in the third identity we take \"H\" = \"G\", we get that the set of commutators is stable under any endomorphism of \"G\". This is in fact a generalization of the second identity, since we can take \"f\" to be the conjugation automorphism on \"G\", formula_15, to get the second identity.\n\nHowever, the product of two or more commutators need not be a commutator. A generic example is [\"a\",\"b\"][\"c\",\"d\"] in the free group on \"a\",\"b\",\"c\",\"d\". It is known that the least order of a finite group for which there exists two commutators whose product is not a commutator is 96; in fact there are two nonisomorphic groups of order 96 with this property.\n\nThis motivates the definition of the commutator subgroup formula_16 (also called the derived subgroup, and denoted formula_17 or formula_18) of \"G\": it is the subgroup generated by all the commutators.\n\nIt follows from the properties of commutators that any element of formula_16 is of the form\n\nfor some natural number formula_21, where the \"g\" and \"h\" are elements of \"G\". Moreover, since formula_22, the commutator subgroup is normal in \"G\". For any homomorphism \"f\": \"G\" → \"H\",\n\nso that formula_24.\n\nThis shows that the commutator subgroup can be viewed as a functor on the category of groups, some implications of which are explored below. Moreover, taking \"G\" = \"H\" it shows that the commutator subgroup is stable under every endomorphism of \"G\": that is, [\"G\",\"G\"] is a fully characteristic subgroup of \"G\", a property which is considerably stronger than normality.\n\nThe commutator subgroup can also be defined as the set of elements \"g\" of the group which have an expression as a product \"g\" = \"g\" \"g\" ... \"g\" that can be rearranged to give the identity.\n\nThis construction can be iterated:\nThe groups formula_27 are called the second derived subgroup, third derived subgroup, and so forth, and the descending normal series\nis called the derived series. This should not be confused with the lower central series, whose terms are formula_29.\n\nFor a finite group, the derived series terminates in a perfect group, which may or may not be trivial. For an infinite group, the derived series need not terminate at a finite stage, and one can continue it to infinite ordinal numbers via transfinite recursion, thereby obtaining the transfinite derived series, which eventually terminates at the perfect core of the group.\n\nGiven a group formula_30, a quotient group formula_31 is abelian if and only if formula_32.\n\nThe quotient formula_33 is an abelian group called the abelianization of formula_30 or formula_30 made abelian. It is usually denoted by formula_36 or formula_37.\n\nThere is a useful categorical interpretation of the map formula_38. Namely formula_39 is universal for homomorphisms from formula_30 to an abelian group formula_41: for any abelian group formula_41 and homomorphism of groups formula_43 there exists a unique homomorphism formula_44 such that formula_45. As usual for objects defined by universal mapping properties, this shows the uniqueness of the abelianization \"G\" up to canonical isomorphism, whereas the explicit construction formula_46 shows existence.\n\nThe abelianization functor is the left adjoint of the inclusion functor from the category of abelian groups to the category of groups. The existence of the abelianization functor Grp → Ab makes the category Ab a reflective subcategory of the category of groups, defined as a full subcategory whose inclusion functor has a left adjoint. \n\nAnother important interpretation of formula_36 is as formula_48, the first homology group of formula_30 with integral coefficients.\n\nA group \"G\" is an abelian group if and only if the derived group is trivial: [\"G\",\"G\"] = {\"e\"}. Equivalently, if and only if the group equals its abelianization. See above for the definition of a group's abelianization.\n\nA group \"G\" is a perfect group if and only if the derived group equals the group itself: [\"G\",\"G\"] = \"G\". Equivalently, if and only if the abelianization of the group is trivial. This is \"opposite\" to abelian.\n\nA group with formula_50 for some \"n\" in N is called a solvable group; this is weaker than abelian, which is the case \"n\" = 1.\n\nA group with formula_51 for all \"n\" in N is called a non-solvable group.\n\nA group with formula_52 for some ordinal number, possibly infinite, is called a hypoabelian group; this is weaker than solvable, which is the case α is finite (a natural number).\n\n\nSince the derived subgroup is characteristic, any automorphism of \"G\" induces an automorphism of the abelianization. Since the abelianization is abelian, inner automorphisms act trivially, hence this yields a map\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8848", "title": "December 19", "text": "December 19\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8849", "title": "December 20", "text": "December 20\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8850", "title": "December 21", "text": "December 21\n\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, December 21st is usually the shortest day of the year and is sometimes regarded as the first day of winter. In the Southern Hemisphere, December 21st is usually the longest day of the year and occurs during the southern summer.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8851", "title": "December 14", "text": "December 14\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8852", "title": "December 13", "text": "December 13\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8855", "title": "Dr. Seuss", "text": "Dr. Seuss\n\nTheodor Seuss Geisel (; March 2, 1904 – September 24, 1991) was an American author, political cartoonist, poet, animator, book publisher, and artist, best known for authoring children's books under the pen name Dr. Seuss (). His work includes several of the most popular children's books of all time, selling over 600 million copies and being translated into more than 20 languages by the time of his death.\n\nGeisel adopted his \"Dr. Seuss\" pen name during his university studies at Dartmouth College and the University of Oxford. He left Oxford in 1927 to begin his career as an illustrator and cartoonist for \"Vanity Fair\", \"Life\", and various other publications. He also worked as an illustrator for advertising campaigns, most notably for Flit and Standard Oil, and as a political cartoonist for the New York newspaper \"PM\". He published his first children's book \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\" in 1937. During World War II, he worked in an animation department of the United States Army where he produced several short films, including \"Design for Death\", which later won the 1947 Academy Award for Documentary Feature.\n\nAfter the war, Geisel focused on children's books, writing classics such as \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950), \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1955), \"If I Ran the Circus\" (1956), \"The Cat in the Hat\" (1957), \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), and \"Green Eggs and Ham\" (1960). He published over 60 books during his career, which have spawned numerous adaptations, including 11 television specials, four feature films, a Broadway musical, and four television series. He won the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1958 for \"Horton Hatches the Egg\" and again in 1961 for \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\". Geisel's birthday, March 2, has been adopted as the annual date for National Read Across America Day, an initiative on reading created by the National Education Association.\n\nGeisel was born and raised in Springfield, Massachusetts, the son of Henrietta (\"née\" Seuss) and Theodor Robert Geisel. All four of his grandparents were German immigrants. His father managed the family brewery and was later appointed to supervise Springfield's public park system by Mayor John A. Denison after the brewery closed because of Prohibition. Mulberry Street in Springfield, made famous in Dr. Seuss' first children's book \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\", is less than a mile southwest of his boyhood home on Fairfield Street. Geisel was raised a Lutheran. He enrolled at Springfield Central High School in 1917 and graduated in 1921. He took an art class as a freshman and later became manager of the school soccer team.\n\nGeisel attended Dartmouth College, graduating in 1925. At Dartmouth, he joined the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity and the humor magazine \"Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern\", eventually rising to the rank of editor-in-chief. While at Dartmouth, he was caught drinking gin with nine friends in his room. At the time, the possession and consumption of alcohol was illegal under Prohibition laws, which remained in place between 1920 and 1933. As a result of this infraction, Dean Craven Laycock insisted that Geisel resign from all extracurricular activities, including the college humor magazine. To continue work on the \"Jack-O-Lantern\" without the administration's knowledge, Geisel began signing his work with the pen name \"Seuss\". He was encouraged in his writing by professor of rhetoric W. Benfield Pressey, whom he described as his \"big inspiration for writing\" at Dartmouth.\n\nUpon graduating from Dartmouth, he entered Lincoln College, Oxford intending to earn a PhD in English literature. At Oxford, he met Helen Palmer, who encouraged him to give up becoming an English teacher in favor of pursuing drawing as a career.\n\nGeisel left Oxford without earning a degree and returned to the United States in February 1927, where he immediately began submitting writings and drawings to magazines, book publishers, and advertising agencies. Making use of his time in Europe, he pitched a series of cartoons called \"Eminent Europeans\" to \"Life\" magazine, but the magazine passed on it. His first nationally published cartoon appeared in the July 16, 1927 issue of \"The Saturday Evening Post\". This single $25 sale encouraged Geisel to move from Springfield to New York City.\n\nLater that year, Geisel accepted a job as writer and illustrator at the humor magazine \"Judge\", and he felt financially stable enough to marry Helen. His first cartoon for \"Judge\" appeared on October 22, 1927, and the Geisels were married on November 29. Geisel's first work signed \"Dr. Seuss\" was published in \"Judge\" about six months after he started working there.\n\nIn early 1928, one of Geisel's cartoons for \"Judge\" mentioned Flit, a common bug spray at the time manufactured by Standard Oil of New Jersey. According to Geisel, the wife of an advertising executive in charge of advertising Flit saw Geisel's cartoon at a hairdresser's and urged her husband to sign him. Geisel's first Flit ad appeared on May 31, 1928, and the campaign continued sporadically until 1941. The campaign's catchphrase \"Quick, Henry, the Flit!\" became a part of popular culture. It spawned a song and was used as a punch line for comedians such as Fred Allen and Jack Benny. As Geisel gained notoriety for the Flit campaign, his work was sought after and began to appear regularly in magazines such as \"Life\", \"Liberty\", and \"Vanity Fair\".\n\nGeisel supported himself and his wife through the Great Depression by drawing advertising for General Electric, NBC, Standard Oil, Narragansett Brewing Company, and many other companies. In 1935, he wrote and drew a short-lived comic strip called \"Hejji\".\n\nThe increased income allowed the Geisels to move to better quarters and to socialize in higher social circles. They became friends with the wealthy family of banker Frank A. Vanderlip. They also traveled extensively: by 1936, Geisel and his wife had visited 30 countries together. They did not have children, neither kept regular office hours, and they had ample money. Geisel also felt that the traveling helped his creativity.\n\nIn 1936, the couple were returning from an ocean voyage to Europe when the rhythm of the ship's engines inspired the poem that became his first book: \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\". Based on Geisel's varied accounts, the book was rejected by between 20 and 43 publishers. According to Geisel, he was walking home to burn the manuscript when a chance encounter with an old Dartmouth classmate led to its publication by Vanguard Press. Geisel wrote four more books before the US entered World War II. This included \"The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins\" in 1938, as well as \"The King's Stilts\" and \"The Seven Lady Godivas\" in 1939, all of which were in prose, atypically for him. This was followed by \"Horton Hatches the Egg\" in 1940, in which Geisel returned to the use of poetry.\n\nGeisel gained a significant public profile through a program for motor boat lubricants produced by Standard Oil under the brand name Essomarine He later recounted that Harry Bruno, Ted Cook, and Verne Carrier worked with him at the National Motor Boat Show on exhibits referred to as the Seuss Navy.\n\nIn 1934, Geisel produced a 30-page booklet titled \"Secrets of the Deep\" which was available by mail after June. At the January boat show for 1935, visitors filled out order cards to receive \"Secrets\". Geisel drew up a Certificate of Commission for visitors in 1936. A mock ship deck called \"SS Essomarine\" provided the scene where photos of \"Admirals\" were taken. That summer, Geisel released a second volume of \"Secrets\". For the 1937 show, he sculpted Marine Muggs and designed a flag for the Seuss Navy.\n\nThe following year featured \"Little Dramas of the Deep\", a six-act play with ten characters. According to Geisel's sister, \"He plans the whole show with scenery and action and then, standing in a realistic bridge, reels off a speech which combines advertising with humor.\" For 1939, exhibitors made available the Nuzzlepuss ashtray and illustrated tide-table calendars.\n\nA Seuss Navy Luncheon was held on January 11, 1940 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. At that year's boat show, Geisel provided the Navigamarama exhibit and the \"Sea Lawyers Gazette\".\n\nThe final contribution to the Essomarine project was the mermaid Essie Neptune and her pet whale in 1941. The exhibit offered photos for a Happy Cruising passport.\n\nAs World War II began, Geisel turned to political cartoons, drawing over 400 in two years as editorial cartoonist for the left-leaning New York City daily newspaper, \"PM\". Geisel's political cartoons, later published in \"Dr. Seuss Goes to War\", denounced Hitler and Mussolini and were highly critical of non-interventionists (\"isolationists\"), most notably Charles Lindbergh, who opposed US entry into the war. One cartoon depicted all Japanese Americans as latent traitors or fifth-columnists, while other cartoons simultaneously deplored the racism at home against Jews and blacks that harmed the war effort. His cartoons were strongly supportive of President Roosevelt's handling of the war, combining the usual exhortations to ration and contribute to the war effort with frequent attacks on Congress (especially the Republican Party), parts of the press (such as the \"New York Daily News\", \"Chicago Tribune\", and \"Washington Times-Herald\"), and others for criticism of Roosevelt, criticism of aid to the Soviet Union, investigation of suspected Communists, and other offences that he depicted as leading to disunity and helping the Nazis, intentionally or inadvertently.\n\nIn 1942, Geisel turned his energies to direct support of the U.S. war effort. First, he worked drawing posters for the Treasury Department and the War Production Board. Then, in 1943, he joined the Army as a Captain and was commander of the Animation Department of the First Motion Picture Unit of the United States Army Air Forces, where he wrote films that included \"Your Job in Germany\", a 1945 propaganda film about peace in Europe after World War II; \"Our Job in Japan\"; and the \"Private Snafu\" series of adult army training films. While in the Army, he was awarded the Legion of Merit. \"Our Job in Japan\" became the basis for the commercially released film \"Design for Death\" (1947), a study of Japanese culture that won the Academy Award for Documentary Feature. \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\" (1950) was based on an original story by Seuss and won the Academy Award for Animated Short Film.\n\nAfter the war, Geisel and his wife moved to La Jolla, California where he returned to writing children's books. He wrote many, including such favorites as \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950), \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1955), \"If I Ran the Circus\" (1956), \"The Cat in the Hat\" (1957), \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), and \"Green Eggs and Ham\" (1960). He received numerous awards throughout his career, but he won neither the Caldecott Medal nor the Newbery Medal. Three of his titles from this period were, however, chosen as Caldecott runners-up (now referred to as Caldecott Honor books): \"McElligot's Pool\" (1947), \"Bartholomew and the Oobleck\" (1949), and \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950). Dr Seuss also wrote the musical and fantasy film \"The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T\", which was released in 1953. The movie was a critical and financial failure, and Geisel never attempted another feature film. During the 1950s, he also published a number of illustrated short stories, mostly in \"Redbook\" Magazine. Some of these were later collected (in volumes such as \"The Sneetches and Other Stories\") or reworked into independent books (\"If I Ran the Zoo\"). A number have never been reprinted since their original appearances.\n\nIn May 1954, \"Life\" magazine published a report on illiteracy among school children which concluded that children were not learning to read because their books were boring. William Ellsworth Spaulding was the director of the education division at Houghton Mifflin (he later became its chairman), and he compiled a list of 348 words that he felt were important for first-graders to recognize. He asked Geisel to cut the list to 250 words and to write a book using only those words. Spaulding challenged Geisel to \"bring back a book children can't put down\". Nine months later, Geisel completed \"The Cat in the Hat\", using 236 of the words given to him. It retained the drawing style, verse rhythms, and all the imaginative power of Geisel's earlier works but, because of its simplified vocabulary, it could be read by beginning readers. \"The Cat in the Hat\" and subsequent books written for young children achieved significant international success and they remain very popular today. In 2009, \"Green Eggs and Ham\" sold 540,366 copies, \"The Cat in the Hat\" sold 452,258 copies, and \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\" (1960) sold 409,068 copies—outselling the majority of newly published children's books.\n\nGeisel went on to write many other children's books, both in his new simplified-vocabulary manner (sold as Beginner Books) and in his older, more elaborate style.\n\nIn 1956, Dartmouth awarded Geisel with an honorary doctorate, finally justifying the \"Dr.\" in his pen name.\n\nOn April 28, 1958, Geisel appeared on an episode of the panel game show \"To Tell the Truth\".\n\nGeisel's wife Helen had a long struggle with illnesses, including cancer and emotional pain over Geisel's affair with Audrey Stone Dimond. On October 23, 1967, Helen committed suicide; Geisel married Dimond on June 21, 1968. Though he devoted most of his life to writing children's books, Geisel had no children of his own, saying of children: \"You have 'em; I'll entertain 'em.\" Dimond added that Geisel \"lived his whole life without children and he was very happy without children.\"\n\nGeisel received the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal from the professional children's librarians in 1980, recognizing his \"substantial and lasting contributions to children's literature\". At the time, it was awarded every five years. He won a special Pulitzer Prize in 1984 citing his \"contribution over nearly half a century to the education and enjoyment of America's children and their parents\".\n\nGeisel died of oral cancer on September 24, 1991 at his home in La Jolla at the age of 87. He was cremated and his ashes were scattered. On December 1, 1995, four years after his death, University of California, San Diego's University Library Building was renamed Geisel Library in honor of Geisel and Audrey for the generous contributions that they made to the library and their devotion to improving literacy.\n\nWhile Geisel was living in La Jolla, the United States Postal Service and others frequently confused him with fellow La Jolla resident Dr. Hans Suess. Their names have been linked together posthumously: the personal papers of Hans Suess are housed in the Geisel Library.\n\nIn 2002, the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden opened in his birthplace of Springfield, Massachusetts, featuring sculptures of Geisel and of many of his characters. On May 28, 2008, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced that Geisel would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The induction ceremony took place December 15 and Geisel's widow Audrey accepted the honor in his place. On March 2, 2009, the web search engine Google temporarily changed its logo to commemorate Geisel's birthday (a practice that it often follows for various holidays and events).\n\nIn 2004, U.S. children's librarians established the annual Theodor Seuss Geisel Award to recognize \"the most distinguished American book for beginning readers published in English in the United States during the preceding year\". It should \"demonstrate creativity and imagination to engage children in reading\" during years pre-K to grade two.\n\nAt Geisel's alma mater of Dartmouth, more than 90 percent of incoming first-year students participate in pre-registration Dartmouth Outing Club trips into the New Hampshire wilderness. It is traditional for students returning from the trips to stay overnight at Dartmouth's Moosilauke Ravine Lodge, where they are served green eggs and ham for breakfast in honor of Dr. Seuss. On April 4, 2012, the Dartmouth Medical School renamed itself the Audrey and Theodor Geisel School of Medicine in honor of their many years of generosity to the college.\n\nDr. Seuss's honors include two Academy awards, two Emmy awards, a Peabody award, the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal, and the Pulitzer Prize.\n\nDr. Seuss has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at the 6500 block of Hollywood Boulevard.\n\nGeisel's most famous pen name is regularly pronounced , an anglicized pronunciation inconsistent with his German surname (the standard German pronunciation is ). He himself noted that it rhymed with \"voice\" (his own pronunciation being ). Alexander Laing, one of his collaborators on the \"Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern\", wrote of it:\n\nGeisel switched to the anglicized pronunciation because it \"evoked a figure advantageous for an author of children's books to be associated with—Mother Goose\" and because most people used this pronunciation. He added the \"Dr.\" to his pen name because his father had always wanted him to practice medicine.\n\nFor books that Geisel wrote and others illustrated, he used the pen name \"Theo LeSieg\", starting with \"I Wish That I Had Duck Feet\" published in 1965. \"LeSieg\" is \"Geisel\" spelled backward. Geisel also published one book under the name Rosetta Stone, 1975's \"Because a Little Bug Went Ka-Choo!!\", a collaboration with Michael K. Frith. Frith and Geisel chose the name in honor of Geisel's second wife Audrey, whose maiden name was Stone.\n\nGeisel was a liberal Democrat and a supporter of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal. His early political cartoons show a passionate opposition to fascism, and he urged action against it both before and after the United States entered World War II. His cartoons portrayed the fear of communism as overstated, finding greater threats in the House Un-American Activities Committee and those who threatened to cut the US \"life line\" to Stalin and the USSR, whom he once depicted as a porter carrying \"our war load\".\n\nGeisel supported the Japanese American internment during World War II. His treatment of the Japanese and of Japanese Americans (between whom he often failed to differentiate) has struck many readers as a moral blind spot. On the issue of the Japanese, he is quoted as saying:\n\nAfter the war, though, Geisel overcame his feelings of animosity, using his book \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1954) as an allegory for the Hiroshima bombing and the American post-war occupation of Japan, as well as dedicating the book to a Japanese friend.\n\nIn 1948, after living and working in Hollywood for years, Geisel moved to La Jolla, California, a predominantly Republican town.\n\nGeisel converted a copy of one of his famous children's books into a polemic shortly before the end of the 1972–74 Watergate scandal, in which United States president Richard Nixon resigned, by replacing the name of the main character everywhere that it occurred. \"Richard M. Nixon, Will You Please Go Now!\" was published in major newspapers through the column of his friend Art Buchwald.\n\nThe line \"a person's a person, no matter \"how\" small!!\" from \"Horton Hears a Who!\" has been used widely as a slogan by the pro-life movement in the U.S., despite the objections of Geisel's widow. The line was first used in such a way in 1986; he demanded a retraction and received one.\n\nGeisel made a point of not beginning to write his stories with a moral in mind, stating that \"kids can see a moral coming a mile off.\" He was not against writing about issues, however; he said that \"there's an inherent moral in any story\", and he remarked that he was \"subversive as hell.\"\n\nMany of Geisel's books express his views on a remarkable variety of social and political issues: \"The Lorax\" (1971), about environmentalism and anti-consumerism; \"The Sneetches\" (1961), about racial equality; \"The Butter Battle Book\" (1984), about the arms race; \"Yertle the Turtle\" (1958), about Hitler and anti-authoritarianism; \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), criticizing the materialism and consumerism of the Christmas season; and \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1954), about anti-isolationism and internationalism.\n\nGeisel wrote most of his books in anapestic tetrameter, a poetic meter employed by many poets of the English literary canon. This is often suggested as one of the reasons that Geisel's writing was so well received.\n\nAnapestic tetrameter consists of four rhythmic units called anapests, each composed of two weak syllables followed by one strong syllable (the beat); often, the first weak syllable is omitted, or an additional weak syllable is added at the end. An example of this meter can be found in Geisel's \"Yertle the Turtle\", from \"Yertle the Turtle and Other Stories\":\n\nSome books by Geisel that are written mainly in anapestic tetrameter also contain many lines written in amphibrachic tetrameter, such as these from \"If I Ran the Circus\":\n\nGeisel also wrote verse in trochaic tetrameter, an arrangement of a strong syllable followed by a weak syllable, with four units per line (for example, the title of \"One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish\"). Traditionally, English trochaic meter permits the final weak position in the line to be omitted, which allows both masculine and feminine rhymes.\n\nGeisel generally maintained trochaic meter for only brief passages, and for longer stretches typically mixed it with iambic tetrameter, which consists of a weak syllable followed by a strong, and is generally considered easier to write. Thus, for example, the magicians in \"Bartholomew and the Oobleck\" make their first appearance chanting in trochees (thus resembling the witches of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\"):\n\nThey then switch to iambs for the oobleck spell:\n\nGeisel's early artwork often employed the shaded texture of pencil drawings or watercolors, but in his children's books of the postwar period, he generally made use of a starker medium—pen and ink—normally using just black, white, and one or two colors. His later books, such as \"The Lorax,\" used more colors.\n\nGeisel's style was unique – his figures are often \"rounded\" and somewhat droopy. This is true, for instance, of the faces of the Grinch and the Cat in the Hat. Almost all his buildings and machinery were devoid of straight lines when they were drawn, even when he was representing real objects. For example, \"If I Ran the Circus\" shows a droopy hoisting crane and a droopy steam calliope.\n\nGeisel evidently enjoyed drawing architecturally elaborate objects. His endlessly varied but never rectilinear palaces, ramps, platforms, and free-standing stairways are among his most evocative creations. Geisel also drew complex imaginary machines, such as the \"Audio-Telly-O-Tally-O-Count\", from \"Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book\", or the \"most peculiar machine\" of Sylvester McMonkey McBean in \"The Sneetches\". Geisel also liked drawing outlandish arrangements of feathers or fur: for example, the 500th hat of \"Bartholomew Cubbins\", the tail of \"Gertrude McFuzz\", and the pet for girls who like to brush and comb, in \"One Fish Two Fish\".\n\nGeisel's illustrations often convey motion vividly. He was fond of a sort of \"voilà\" gesture in which the hand flips outward and the fingers spread slightly backward with the thumb up. This motion is done by Ish in \"One Fish Two Fish\" when he creates fish (who perform the gesture themselves with their fins), in the introduction of the various acts of \"If I Ran the Circus\", and in the introduction of the \"Little Cats\" in \"The Cat in the Hat Comes Back\". He was also fond of drawing hands with interlocked fingers, making it look as though his characters were twiddling their thumbs.\n\nGeisel also follows the cartoon tradition of showing motion with lines, like in the sweeping lines that accompany Sneelock's final dive in \"If I Ran the Circus\". Cartoon lines are also used to illustrate the action of the senses—sight, smell, and hearing—in \"The Big Brag,\" and lines even illustrate \"thought\", as in the moment when the Grinch conceives his awful plan to ruin Christmas.\n\nGeisel's early work in advertising and editorial cartooning helped him to produce \"sketches\" of things that received more perfect realization later in his children's books. Often, the expressive use to which Geisel put an image later on was quite different from the original. Here are some examples:\n\n\nGeisel wrote more than 60 books over the course of his long career. Most were published under his well-known pseudonym Dr. Seuss, though he also authored more than a dozen books as Theo LeSieg and one as Rosetta Stone. His books have topped many bestseller lists, sold over 600 million copies, and been translated into more than 20 languages. In 2000, \"Publishers Weekly\" compiled a list of the best-selling children's books of all time; of the top 100 hardcover books, 16 were written by Geisel, including \"Green Eggs and Ham\", at number 4, \"The Cat in the Hat\", at number 9, and \"One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish\", at number 13. In the years after his death in 1991, two additional books were published based on his sketches and notes: \"Hooray for Diffendoofer Day!\" and \"Daisy-Head Mayzie\". \"My Many Colored Days\" was originally written in 1973 but was posthumously published in 1996. In September 2011, seven stories originally published in magazines during the 1950s were released in a collection titled \"The Bippolo Seed and Other Lost Stories\".\n\nGeisel also wrote a pair of books for adults: \"The Seven Lady Godivas\" (1939; reprinted 1987), a retelling of the Lady Godiva legend that included nude depictions; and \"You're Only Old Once!\" (written in 1986 when Geisel was 82), which chronicles an old man's journey through a clinic. His last book was \"Oh, the Places You'll Go!\", which published the year before his death and became a popular gift for graduating students.\n\nFor most of his career, Geisel was reluctant to have his characters marketed in contexts outside of his own books. However, he did permit the creation of several animated cartoons, an art form in which he himself had gained experience during the Second World War, and he gradually relaxed his policy as he aged.\n\nThe first adaptation of one of Geisel's works was a cartoon version of \"Horton Hatches the Egg\", animated at Warner Bros. in 1942 and directed by Robert Clampett. It was presented as part of the Merrie Melodies series and included a number of gags not present in the original narrative, including a fish committing suicide and a Katharine Hepburn imitation by Mayzie.\n\nAs part of the Puppetoon theatrical cartoon series for Paramount Pictures, two of Geisel's works were adapted into stop-motion films by George Pal. The first, \"The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins\", was released in 1943 and nominated for an Academy Award for \"Short Subject (Cartoon)\" the following year. The second, \"And to Think I Saw It On Mulberry Street\", with a title slightly altered from the book's, was released in 1944.\n\nIn 1959, Geisel authorized Revell, the well-known plastic model-making company, to make a series of \"animals\" that snapped together rather than being glued together, and could be assembled, disassembled, and re-assembled \"in thousands\" of ways. The series was called the \"Dr. Seuss Zoo\" and included Gowdy the Dowdy Grackle, Norval the Bashful Blinket, Tingo the Noodle Topped Stroodle, and Roscoe the Many Footed Lion. The basic body parts were the same and all were interchangeable, and so it was possible for children to combine parts from various characters in essentially unlimited ways in creating their own animal characters (Revell encouraged this by selling Gowdy, Norval, and Tingo together in a \"Gift Set\" as well as individually). Revell also made a conventional glue-together \"beginner's kit\" of The Cat in the Hat.\n\nIn 1966, Geisel authorized eminent cartoon artist Chuck Jones – his friend and former colleague from the war – to make a cartoon version of \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\". Geisel was credited as a co-producer under his real name Ted Geisel, along with Jones. The cartoon was narrated by Boris Karloff, who also provided the voice of the Grinch. It was very faithful to the original book, and is considered a classic to this day by many. It is often broadcast as an annual Christmas television special. Jones directed an adaptation of \"Horton Hears a Who!\" in 1970 and produced an adaptation of \"The Cat in the Hat\" in 1971.\n\nFrom 1972 to 1983, Geisel wrote six animated specials which were produced by DePatie-Freleng: \"The Lorax\" (1972); \"Dr. Seuss on the Loose\" (1973); \"The Hoober-Bloob Highway\" (1975); \"Halloween Is Grinch Night\" (1977); \"Pontoffel Pock, Where Are You?\" (1980); and \"The Grinch Grinches the Cat in the Hat\" (1982). Several of the specials won multiple Emmy Awards.\n\nA Soviet paint-on-glass-animated short film was made in 1986 called \"Welcome\", an adaptation of \"Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose\". The last adaptation of Geisel's work before he died was \"The Butter Battle Book\", a television special based on the book of the same name, directed by adult animation legend Ralph Bakshi.\n\nA television film titled \"In Search of Dr. Seuss\" was released in 1994 which adapted many of Seuss's stories. It uses both live-action versions and animated versions of the characters and stories featured; however, the animated portions were merely edited versions of previous animated television specials and, in some cases, re-dubbed as well.\n\nAfter Geisel died of cancer at the age of 87 in 1991, his widow Audrey Geisel was placed in charge of all licensing matters. She approved a live-action feature-film version of \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\" starring Jim Carrey, as well as a Seuss-themed Broadway musical called \"Seussical\", and both premiered in 2000. \"The Grinch\" has had limited engagement runs on Broadway during the Christmas season, after premiering in 1998 (under the title \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\") at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego, where it has become a Christmas tradition. In 2003, another live-action film was released, this time an adaptation of \"The Cat in the Hat\" that featured Mike Myers as the title character. Audrey Geisel has spoken critically of the film, especially the casting of Myers as the Cat in the Hat, and stated that she would not allow any further live-action adaptations of Geisel's books. However, an animated CGI feature film adaptation of \"Horton Hears a Who!\" was approved, and was eventually released on March 14, 2008, to critical acclaim. A CGI-animated feature film adaptation of \"The Lorax\" was released by Universal on March 2, 2012 (on what would have been Seuss's 108th birthday).\n\nFour television series have been adapted from Geisel's work. The first, \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\", was an animated television adaptation of Geisel's 1951 cartoon of the same name and lasted three months between 1956 and 1957. The second, \"The Wubbulous World of Dr. Seuss\", was a mix of live-action and puppetry by Jim Henson Television, the producers of The Muppets. It aired for one season on Nickelodeon in the United States, from 1996 to 1997. The third, \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\", is a remake of the 1956 series. Produced in Canada by Cookie Jar Entertainment (now DHX Media) and North America by Classic Media (now DreamWorks Classics), it ran from 2005 to 2007. The fourth, \"The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That!\", produced by Portfolio Entertainment Inc., began on August 7, 2010, in Canada and September 6, 2010, in the United States and is currently still showing. \n\nGeisel's books and characters are also featured in Seuss Landing, one of many islands at the Islands of Adventure theme park in Orlando, Florida. In an attempt to match Geisel's visual style, there are reportedly \"no straight lines\" in Seuss Landing.\n\n\"The Hollywood Reporter\" has reported that Johnny Depp has agreed to produce and possibly star in a film based on Geisel's life. The film will be written by Keith Bunin, produced by Depp's Infinitum Nihil production company alongside Illumination Entertainment and distributed by Universal Pictures.\n\n\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "8858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8858", "title": "Digital compositing", "text": "Digital compositing\n\nDigital compositing is the process of digitally assembling multiple images to make a final image, typically for print, motion pictures or screen display. It is the digital analogue of optical film compositing.\n\nThe basic operation used in digital compositing is known as 'alpha blending', where an opacity value, 'α', is used to control the proportions of two input pixel values that end up a single output pixel.\n\nAs a simple example, suppose two images of the same size are available and they are to be composited. The input images are referred to as the foreground image and the background image. Each image consists of the same number of pixels. Compositing is performed by mathematically combining information from the corresponding pixels from the two input images and recording the result in a third image, which is called the composited image.\n\nConsider three pixels;\nand \n\nThen, considering all three colour channels, and assuming that the colour channels are expressed in a γ=1 colour space (that is to say, the measured values are proportional to light intensity), we have:\n\nNote that if the operations are performed in a colour space where γ is not equal to 1 then the operation will lead to non-linear effects which can potentially be seen as aliasing artifacts (or 'jaggies') along sharp edges in the matte. More generally, nonlinear compositing can have effects such as \"halos\" around composited objects, because the influence of the alpha channel is non-linear. It is possible for a compositing artist to compensate for the effects of compositing in non-linear space.\n\nPerforming alpha blending is an expensive operation if performed on an entire image or 3D scene. If this operation has to be done in real time video games there is an easy trick to boost performance.\n\nBy simply rewriting the mathematical expression one can save 50% of the multiplications required.\n\nWhen many partially transparent layers need to be composited together, it is worthwhile to consider the algebraic properties of compositing operators used. Specifically, the associativity and commutativity determine when repeated calculation can or cannot be avoided.\n\nConsider the case when we have four layers to blend to produce the final image: F=A*(B*(C*D)) where A, B, C, D are partially transparent image layers and \"*\" denotes a compositing operator (with the left layer on top of the right layer). If only layer C changes, we should find a way to avoid re-blending all of the layers when computing F. Without any special considerations, four full-image blends would need to occur. For compositing operators that are commutative, such as additive blending, it is safe to re-order the blending operations. In this case, we might compute T=A*(B*D) only once and simply blend T*C to produce F, a single operation. Unfortunately, most operators are not commutative. However, many are associative, suggesting it is safe to re-group operations to F=(A*B)*(C*D), i.e. without changing their order. In this case we may compute S:=A*B once and save this result. To form F with an associative operator, we need only do two additional compositing operations to integrate the new layer S, by computing F:=S*(C*D). Note that this expression indicates compositing C with all of the layers below it in one step and then blending all of the layers on top of it with the previous result to produce the final image in the second step.\n\nIf all layers of an image change regularly but a large number of layer still need to be composited (such as in distributed rendering), the commutativity of a compositing operator can still be exploited to speed up computation through parallelism even when there is no gain from pre-computation. Again, consider the image F=A*(B*(C*D)). Each compositing operation in this expression depends on the next, leading to serial computation. However, associativity can allow us to rewrite F=(A*B)*(C*D) where there are clearly two operations that do not depend on each other that may be executed in parallel. In general, we can build a tree of pair-wise compositing operations with a height that is logarithmic in the number of layers.\n\nThe most historically significant nonlinear compositing system was the Cineon, which operated in a logarithmic color space, which more closely mimics the natural light response of film emulsions (the Cineon system, made by Kodak, is no longer in production). Due to the limitations of processing speed and memory, compositing artists did not usually have the luxury of having the system make intermediate conversions to linear space for the compositing steps. Over time, the limitations have become much less significant, and now most compositing is done in a linear color space, even in cases where the source imagery is in a logarithmic color space.\n\nCompositing often also includes scaling, retouching and colour correction of images.\n\nThere are two radically different digital compositing workflows: node-based compositing and layer-based compositing.\n\nNode-based compositing represents an entire composite as a tree graph, linking media objects and effects in a procedural map, intuitively laying out the progression from source input to final output, and is in fact the way all compositing applications internally handle composites. This type of compositing interface allows great flexibility, including the ability to modify the parameters of an earlier image processing step \"in context\" (while viewing the final composite). Node-based compositing packages often handle keyframing and time effects poorly, as their workflow does not stem directly from a timeline, as do layer-based compositing packages. Software which incorporates a node based interface include Apple Shake, Blender, Blackmagic Fusion, and The Foundry's Nuke.\n\nLayer-based compositing represents each media object in a composite as a separate layer within a timeline, each with its own time bounds, effects, and keyframes. All the layers are stacked, one above the next, in any desired order; and the bottom layer is usually rendered as a base in the resultant image, with each higher layer being progressively rendered on top of the previously composited of layers, moving upward until all layers have been rendered into the final composite. Layer-based compositing is very well suited for rapid 2D and limited 3D effects such as in motion graphics, but becomes awkward for more complex composites entailing a large number of layers. A partial solution to this is some programs' ability to view the composite-order of elements (such as images, effects, or other attributes) with a visual diagram called a flowchart to nest compositions, or \"comps,\" directly into other compositions, thereby adding complexity to the render-order by first compositing layers in the beginning composition, then combining that resultant image with the layered images from the proceeding composition, and so on. An example of this exists in the Adobe program After Effects.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8859", "title": "Dandy", "text": "Dandy\n\nA dandy, historically, is a man who places particular importance upon physical appearance, refined language, and leisurely hobbies, pursued with the appearance of nonchalance in a cult of self. A dandy could be a self-made man who strove to imitate an aristocratic lifestyle despite coming from a middle-class background, especially in late 18th- and early 19th-century Britain.\n\nPrevious manifestations of the \"petit-maître\" (French for small master) and the Muscadin have been noted by John C. Prevost, but the modern practice of dandyism first appeared in the revolutionary 1790s, both in London and in Paris. The dandy cultivated cynical reserve, yet to such extremes that novelist George Meredith, himself no dandy, once defined cynicism as \"intellectual dandyism\". Some took a more benign view; Thomas Carlyle wrote in \"Sartor Resartus\" that a dandy was no more than \"a clothes-wearing man\". Honoré de Balzac introduced the perfectly worldly and unmoved Henri de Marsay in \"La fille aux yeux d'or\" (1835), a part of \"La Comédie Humaine\", who fulfils at first the model of a perfect dandy, until an obsessive love-pursuit unravels him in passionate and murderous jealousy.\n\nCharles Baudelaire defined the dandy, in the later \"metaphysical\" phase of dandyism, as one who elevates æsthetics to a living religion, that the dandy's mere existence reproaches the responsible citizen of the middle class: \"Dandyism in certain respects comes close to spirituality and to stoicism\" and \"These beings have no other status, but that of cultivating the idea of beauty in their own persons, of satisfying their passions, of feeling and thinking ... Dandyism is a form of Romanticism. Contrary to what many thoughtless people seem to believe, dandyism is not even an excessive delight in clothes and material elegance. For the perfect dandy, these things are no more than the symbol of the aristocratic superiority of mind.\"\n\nThe linkage of clothing with political protest had become a particularly English characteristic during the 18th century. Given these connotations, dandyism can be seen as a political protest against the levelling of egalitarian principles, often including nostalgic adherence to feudal or pre-industrial values, such as the ideals of \"the perfect gentleman\" or \"the autonomous aristocrat\". Paradoxically, the dandy required an audience, as Susann Schmid observed in examining the \"successfully marketed lives\" of Oscar Wilde and Lord Byron, who exemplify the dandy's roles in the public sphere, both as writers and as \"personae\" providing sources of gossip and scandal. Nigel Rodgers in \"The Dandy: Peacock or Enigma?\" questions Wilde's status as a genuine dandy, seeing him as someone who only assumed a dandified stance in passing, not a man dedicated to the exacting ideals of dandyism.\n\nThe origin of the word is uncertain. \"Eccentricity\", defined as taking characteristics such as dress and appearance to extremes, began to be applied generally to human behavior in the 1770s; similarly, the word \"dandy\" first appears in the late 18th century: In the years immediately preceding the American Revolution, the first verse and chorus of \"Yankee Doodle\" derided the alleged poverty and rough manners of American-citizen colonists, suggesting that whereas a fine horse and gold-braided clothing (\"mac[c]aroni\") were required to set a dandy apart from those around him, the average American-citizen colonists means were so meager that ownership of a mere pony and a few feathers for personal ornamentation would qualify one of them as a \"dandy\" by comparison to and/or in the minds of his even less sophisticated Eurasian compatriots. A slightly later Scottish border ballad, circa 1780, also features the word, but probably without all the contextual aspects of its more recent meaning. The original, full form of 'dandy' may have been \"jack-a-dandy\". It was a vogue word during the Napoleonic Wars. In that contemporary slang, a \"dandy\" was differentiated from a \"fop\" in that the dandy's dress was more refined and sober than the fop's.\n\nIn the twenty-first century, the word \"dandy\" is a jocular, often sarcastic adjective meaning \"fine\" or \"great\"; when used in the form of a noun, it refers to a well-groomed and well-dressed man, but often to one who is also self-absorbed.\n\nThe model dandy in British society was George Bryan \"Beau\" Brummell (1778–1840), in his early days, an undergraduate student at Oriel College, Oxford and later, an associate of the Prince Regent. Brummell was not from an aristocratic background; indeed, his greatness was \"based on nothing at all,\" as J.A. Barbey d'Aurevilly observed in 1845. Never unpowdered or unperfumed, immaculately bathed and shaved, and dressed in a plain dark blue coat, he was always perfectly brushed, perfectly fitted, showing much perfectly starched linen, all freshly laundered, and composed with an elaborately knotted cravat. From the mid-1790s, Beau Brummell was the early incarnation of \"the celebrity\", a man chiefly famous for \"being\" famous—in his case, as a laconically witty clothes-horse.\n\nBy the time Pitt taxed hair powder in 1795 to help pay for the war against France and to discourage the use of flour (which had recently increased in both rarity and price, owing to bad harvests) in such a frivolous product, Brummell had already abandoned wearing a wig, and had his hair cut in the Roman fashion, \"à la Brutus\". Moreover, he led the transition from breeches to snugly tailored dark \"pantaloons,\" which directly led to contemporary trousers, the sartorial mainstay of men's clothes in the Western world for the past two centuries. In 1799, upon coming of age, Beau Brummell inherited from his father a fortune of thirty thousand pounds, which he spent mostly on costume, gambling, and high living. In 1816 he suffered bankruptcy, the dandy's stereotyped fate; he fled his creditors to France, quietly dying in 1840, in a lunatic asylum in Caen, just before age 62.\n\nMen of more notable accomplishments than Beau Brummell also adopted the dandiacal pose: George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron occasionally dressed the part, helping reintroduce the frilled, lace-cuffed and lace-collared \"poet shirt\". In that spirit, he had his portrait painted in Albanian costume.\n\nAnother prominent dandy of the period was Alfred Guillaume Gabriel d'Orsay, the Count d'Orsay, who had been friends with Byron and who moved in the highest social circles of London.\n\nIn 1836 Thomas Carlyle wrote: A Dandy is a clothes-wearing Man, a Man whose trade, office and existence consists in the wearing of Clothes. Every faculty of his soul, spirit, purse, and person is heroically consecrated to this one object, the wearing of Clothes wisely and well: so that the others dress to live, he lives to dress ... And now, for all this perennial Martyrdom, and Poesy, and even Prophecy, what is it that the Dandy asks in return? Solely, we may say, that you would recognise his existence; would admit him to be a living object; or even failing this, a visual object, or thing that will reflect rays of light...\n\nBy the mid-19th century, the English dandy, within the muted palette of male fashion, exhibited minute refinements—\"The quality of the fine woollen cloth, the slope of a pocket flap or coat revers, exactly the right colour for the gloves, the correct amount of shine on boots and shoes, and so on. It was an image of a well-dressed man who, while taking infinite pains about his appearance, affected indifference to it. This refined dandyism continued to be regarded as an essential strand of male Englishness.\"\n\nThe beginnings of dandyism in France were bound to the politics of the French revolution; the initial stage of dandyism, the gilded youth, was a political statement of dressing in an aristocratic style in order to distinguish its members from the sans-culottes.\n\nDuring his heyday, Beau Brummell's \"dictat\" on both fashion and etiquette reigned supreme. His habits of dress and fashion were much imitated, especially in France, where, in a curious development, they became the rage, especially in bohemian quarters. There, dandies sometimes were celebrated in revolutionary terms: self-created men of consciously designed personality, radically breaking with past traditions. With elaborate dress and idle, decadent styles of life, French bohemian dandies sought to convey contempt for and superiority to bourgeois society. In the latter 19th century, this fancy-dress bohemianism was a major influence on the Symbolist movement in French literature.\n\nBaudelaire was deeply interested in dandyism, and memorably wrote that a dandy aspirant must have \"no profession other than elegance... no other status, but that of cultivating the idea of beauty in their own persons... The dandy must aspire to be sublime without interruption; he must live and sleep before a mirror.\" Other French intellectuals also were interested in the dandies strolling the streets and boulevards of Paris. Jules Amédée Barbey d'Aurevilly wrote \"On Dandyism and George Brummell\", an essay devoted, in great measure, to examining the career of Beau Brummell.\n\nThe literary dandy is a familiar figure in the writings, and sometimes the self-presentation, of Oscar Wilde, H.H. Munro (Clovis and Reginald), P.G. Wodehouse (Bertie Wooster) and Ronald Firbank, writers linked by their subversive air.\n\nThe poets Algernon Charles Swinburne and Oscar Wilde, Walter Pater, the American artist James McNeill Whistler, the Spanish artist Salvador Dalí, Joris-Karl Huysmans, and Max Beerbohm were dandies of the Belle Époque, as was Robert de Montesquiou — Marcel Proust's inspiration for the Baron de Charlus. In Italy, Gabriele d'Annunzio and Carlo Bugatti exemplified the artistic bohemian dandyism of the fin de siecle. Wilde wrote that, \"One should either be a work of Art, or wear a work of Art.\"\n\nAt the end of the 19th century, American dandies were called dudes. Evander Berry Wall was nicknamed the \"King of the Dudes\".\n\nGeorge Walden, in the essay \"Who's a Dandy?\", identifies Noël Coward, Andy Warhol, and Quentin Crisp as modern dandies. The character Psmith in the novels of P. G. Wodehouse is considered a dandy, both physically and intellectually. Agatha Christie's Poirot is said to be a dandy.\n\nThe artist Sebastian Horsley described himself as a \"dandy in the underworld\" in his eponymous autobiography.\n\nIn Japan, dandyism became a fashion subculture during the late 1990s.\n\nIn Spain during the early 19th century a curious phenomenon developed linked to the idea of dandyism. While in England and France individuals from the middle classes adopted aristocratic manners, the Spanish aristocracy adopted the fashions of the lower classes, called majos. They were characterized by their elaborate outfits and sense of style as opposed to the modern Frenchified \"afrancesados\", as for their cheeky arrogant attitude.\nSome famous dandies in later times were amongst other the Duke of Osuna, Mariano Tellez-Girón, artist Salvador Dalí and poet Luís Cernuda.\n\nAlbert Camus said in \"L'Homme révolté\" (1951) that: The dandy creates his own unity by aesthetic means. But it is an aesthetic of negation. \"To live and die before a mirror\": that according to Baudelaire, was the dandy's slogan. It is indeed a coherent slogan. The dandy is, by occupation, always in opposition. He can only exist by defiance. Up to now, man derived his coherence from the Creator. But from the moment that he consecrates his rupture from Him, he finds himself delivered over to the fleeting moment, to the passing days, and to wasted sensibility. Therefore he must take himself in hand. The dandy rallies his forces and creates a unity for himself by the very violence of his refusal. Profligate, like all people without a rule of life, he is only coherent as an actor. But an actor implies a public; the dandy can only play a part by setting himself up in opposition. He can only be sure of his own existence by finding it in the expression of others' faces. Other people are his mirror. A mirror that quickly becomes clouded, it's true, since human capacity for attention is limited. It must be ceaselessly stimulated, spurred on by provocation. The dandy, therefore, is always compelled to astonish. Singularity is his vocation, excess his way to perfection. Perpetually incomplete, always on the fringe of things, he compels others to create him, while denying their values. He plays at life because he is unable to live it.\n\nJean Baudrillard said that dandyism is \"an aesthetic form of nihilism\".\n\nCarlos Espartaco said about the American philosopher and poet Eduardo Sanguinetti:\"Only the dandy, last heir of the stoic tentative, has imposed himself in the world of appearance as a thing and has evaded fashion in the name of a \"mode\" that would be inseparable of him. Actually, it is necessary to summon the void in itself, to conqueror the cool way that qualifies the dandy, which is \"thousand of kilometers farther from immediate sensations\". And for Eduardo Sanguinetti this means, in terms of the multiple strategics he will use in the passages from \"anti-fashion\" to \"look\" a radical self-emptying that emancipates from time, but that does not reject the effort that has to do to register the emerging novelty. Obtaining this space resembles a landscape, where, in accordance with Baudelaire \"carries Hercules upon his shoulders\".\nThe female counterpart is a quaintrelle, a woman who emphasizes a life of passion expressed through personal style, leisurely pastimes, charm, and cultivation of life's pleasures.\n\nIn the 12th century, \"cointerrels\" (male) and \"cointrelles\" (female) emerged, based upon \"coint\", a word applied to things skilfully made, later indicating a person of beautiful dress and refined speech. By the 18th century, \"coint\" became \"quaint\", indicating elegant speech and beauty. Middle English dictionaries note \"quaintrelle\" as a beautifully dressed woman (or overly dressed), but do not include the favorable personality elements of grace and charm. The notion of a quaintrelle sharing the major philosophical components of refinement with dandies is a modern development that returns quaintrelles to their historic roots.\n\nFemale dandies did overlap with male dandies for a brief period during the early 19th century when \"dandy\" had a derisive definition of \"fop\" or \"over-the-top fellow\"; the female equivalents were \"dandyess\" or \"dandizette\". Charles Dickens, in \"All the Year Around\" (1869) comments, \"The dandies and dandizettes of 1819–1820 must have been a strange race. \"Dandizette\" was a term applied to feminine devotees to dress and their absurdities were fully equal to those of the dandy.\" In 1819, the novel \"Charms of Dandyism\" was published \"by Olivia Moreland, chief of the female dandies\"; although probably written by Thomas Ashe, \"Olivia Moreland\" may have existed, as Ashe did write several novels about living persons. Throughout the novel, dandyism is associated with \"living in style\". Later, as the word \"dandy\" evolved to denote refinement, it became applied solely to men. \"Popular Culture and Performance in the Victorian City\" (2003) notes this evolution in the latter 19th century: \"...or \"dandizette\", although the term was increasingly reserved for men.\"\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8860", "title": "Dubbing (filmmaking)", "text": "Dubbing (filmmaking)\n\nDubbing, mixing, or re-recording is a post-production process used in filmmaking and video production in which additional or supplementary recordings are \"mixed\" with original production sound to create the finished soundtrack.\n\nThe process usually takes place on a dub stage. After sound editors edit and prepare all necessary tracks (dialogue, automated dialogue replacement (ADR), effects, Foley, and music), the dubbing mixer or mixers proceed to balance all of the elements and record the finished soundtrack. Dubbing is sometimes confused with ADR, also known as \"additional dialogue replacement\", \"additional dialogue recording\", and \"looping\", in which the original actors re-record and synchronize audio segments.\n\nOutside the film industry, the term \"dubbing\" most commonly refers to the replacement of the voices of the actors shown on the screen with those of different performers speaking another language, which is called \"revoicing\" in the film industry.\n\nIn the past, dubbing was practiced primarily in musicals when the actor had an unsatisfactory singing voice. Today, dubbing enables the screening of audiovisual material to a mass audience in countries where viewers do not speak the same language as the performers in the original production.\n\nFilms, videos, and sometimes video games are often dubbed into the local language of a foreign market. In foreign distribution, dubbing is common in theatrically released films, television films, television series, cartoons, and anime.\n\nAutomated dialogue replacement (ADR) is the process of re-recording dialogue by the original actor after the filming process to improve audio quality or reflect dialogue changes (also known as \"looping\" or a \"looping session\"). In India the process is simply known as \"dubbing\", while in the UK, it is also called \"post-synchronisation\" or \"post-sync\". The insertion of voice actor performances for animation, such as computer-generated imagery or animated cartoons, is often referred to as ADR although it generally does not replace existing dialogue.\n\nThe ADR process may be used to: \n\nIn conventional film production, a production sound mixer records dialogue during filming. During post-production, a supervising sound editor, or ADR supervisor, reviews all of the dialogue in the film and decides which lines must be re-recorded. ADR is recorded during an ADR session, which takes place in a specialized sound studio. The actor, usually the original actor from the set, views the scene with the original sound, then attempts to recreate the performance. Over the course of multiple takes, the actor performs the lines while watching the scene; the most suitable take becomes the final version. The ADR process does not always take place in a post-production studio. The process may be recorded on location, with mobile equipment. ADR can also be recorded without showing the actor the image they must match, but by having them listen to the performance, since some actors believe that watching themselves act can degrade subsequent performances.\n\nSometimes, a different actor than the original actor on set is used during ADR. One famous example is the \"Star Wars\" character Darth Vader portrayed by David Prowse; in post-production, James Earl Jones dubbed the voice of Vader.\n\nOther examples include:\n\nAn alternative method to dubbing, called \"rythmo band\" (or \"lip-sync band\"), has historically been used in Canada and France. It provides a more precise guide for the actors, directors, and technicians, and can be used to complement the traditional ADR method. The \"band\" is actually a clear 35 mm film leader on which the dialogue is hand-written in India ink, together with numerous additional indications for the actor—including laughs, cries, length of syllables, mouth sounds, breaths, and mouth openings and closings. The rythmo band is projected in the studio and scrolls in perfect synchronization with the picture.\n\nStudio time is used more efficiently, since with the aid of scrolling text, picture, and audio cues, actors can read more lines per hour than with ADR alone (only picture and audio). With ADR, actors can average 10–12 lines per hour, while rythmo band can facilitate the reading of 35-50 lines per hour.\n\nHowever, the preparation of a rythmo band is a time-consuming process involving a series of specialists organized in a production line. This has prevented the technique from being more widely adopted, but software emulations of rythmo band technology overcome the disadvantages of the traditional rythmo band process and significantly reduce the time needed to prepare a dubbing session.\n\nVideoDubber, a technology startup company from Israel, developed an automated dubbing SaaS platform that enables automated dubbing of video content to over 40 languages using digitized voices. It was the first to dub a full TV channel using this technology for a Spanish cable provider in July 2015.\n\nMedia Movers, Inc., a dubbing company, has developed a piece of proprietary software that can automatically sync ADR/dubbed tracks with pre-defined algorithms.\n\nTM Systems received Emmy awards in 2002 and 2007 for their dubbing and subtitling software.\n\nDubbing is often used to localize a foreign movie. The new voice track is usually spoken by a voice artist, or voice actor. In many countries, actors who regularly perform this duty remain little-known, with the exception of particular circles (such as anime fandom) or when their voices have become synonymous with roles or actors whose voices they usually dub. In the United States, many of these voice artists may employ pseudonyms or go uncredited due to Screen Actors Guild regulations or the desire to dissociate themselves from the role.\n\nEspecially in comedies and animated movies, famous local actors may be hired to perform the dubbing, as their names are intended to attract a local audience; the entire cast may be dubbed by a local cast of similar familiarity.\n\nIn North-West Europe (the UK, Republic of Ireland, the Netherlands, the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium and the Nordic countries), Portugal and Balkan countries, generally only movies and TV shows intended for children are dubbed, while TV shows and movies for older audiences are subtitled (although animated productions have a tradition of being dubbed). For movies in cinemas with clear target audiences (both below and above 10–11 years of age), both a dubbed and a subtitled version are usually available.\n\nIn the Netherlands, for the most part, Dutch versions are only made for children's and family films. Animated movies are shown in theaters with Dutch dubbing, but usually those cinemas with more screening rooms also provide the original subtitled version, such as movies like \"Finding Nemo\", \"Shrek the Third\" and \"WALL-E\".\n\nIn the Dutch speaking part of Belgium (Flanders), movies and TV series are shown in their original language with subtitles, with the exception of most movies made for a young audience. In the latter case, sometimes separate versions are recorded in the Netherlands and in Flanders (for instance, several Walt Disney films and \"Harry Potter\" films). These dubbed versions only differ from each other in their use of different voice actors and different pronunciation, while the text is almost the same.\n\nIn the French speaking part of Belgium, the range of French-dubbed versions is approximately as wide as the German range, where nearly all movies and TV series are dubbed.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, the vast majority of foreign language films are subtitled, although mostly animated films and TV programmes are dubbed in English. These usually originate from North America, as opposed to being dubbed locally. There have, however, been notable examples of films and TV programmes successfully dubbed in the UK, such as the Japanese \"Monkey\" and French \"Magic Roundabout\" series. When airing films on television, channels in the UK often choose subtitling over dubbing, even if a dubbing in English exists. It is also a fairly common practice for animation aimed at preschool children to be re-dubbed with British voice actors replacing the original voices, although this is not done with shows aimed at older audiences.\n\nSome animated films and TV programmes are also dubbed into Welsh and Scottish Gaelic.\n\nIreland usually receives the same film versions as the UK. However some films have been dubbed into Irish by TG4, including the Harry Potter film series.\n\nIn Romania, virtually all programmes intended for children are dubbed in Romanian, including cartoons, live-action movies and TV series on Disney Channel, Cartoon Network, Minimax, and Nickelodeon, as well as those shown on general television networks, children-focused series (such as \"Power Rangers\", \"Goosebumps\", \"The New Addams Family\", \"The Planet's Funniest Animals\") or movies screened on children's television. Animated movies are shown in theaters with Romanian dubbing. However, those cinemas with more screening rooms usually also provide the original subtitled version. Such was the case for movies like \"Babe\", \"\", \"Finding Nemo\", \"Cars\", \"Shrek the Third\", \"Ratatouille\", \"Kung Fu Panda\" and \"WALL-E\". Other foreign TV shows and movies are shown in the original language with Romanian subtitles. Subtitles are usually preferred in the Romanian market. According to \"Special Eurobarometer 243\" (graph QA11.8) of the European Commission (research carried out in November and December 2005), 62% of Romanians prefer to watch foreign films and programmes with subtitles (rather than dubbed), 22% prefer dubbing, and 16% declined to answer. This is led by the assumption that watching movies in their original versions is very useful for learning foreign languages. However, according to the same Eurobarometer, virtually no Romanian found this method—watching movies in their original version—to be the most efficient way to learn foreign languages, compared to 53 percent who preferred language lessons at school.\n\nIn Romania, foreign language television programs and films are generally subtitled rather than dubbed. This includes programs in non-Western languages, such as Korean.\n\nSerbian-language dubs are broadcast in Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia & Herzegovina, whereas children's movies and cartoons are dubbed into Serbian and some Live-Action films and TV series. The dubbing of cartoon series in former Yugoslavia during the 1980s had a twist of its own: famous Belgrade actors provided the voices for characters of Disney, Warner Brothers, MGM and other companies, frequently using region-specific phrases and sentences and, thus, adding a dose of local humor to the translation of the original lines. These phrases became immensely popular and are still being used for tongue-in-cheek comments in specific situations. Some of the Serbian dubs are also broadcast in Croatia and the Republic of Macedonia.\n\nIn Croatia, foreign films and TV series are always subtitled, while most children's programs and animated movies are dubbed into Croatian. The practice of dubbing began in the 1980s in some animated shows and continued in 90's, 00's and forward in other shows and films, the latter ones being released in home media. Recently, more efforts have been made to introduce dubbing, but public reception has been poor in some exceptions. Regardless of language, Croatian audiences prefer subtitling to dubbing, however it is still popular in animated films. Some previously popular shows (such as \"Sailor Moon\") lost their appeal completely after the practice of dubbing began, and the dubbing was eventually removed from the programs. This situation is similar with theater movies, with only those intended for children being dubbed (such as \"Finding Nemo\" and \"Shark Tale\"), but they are also regularly shown subtitled as well, but nowadays are shown in dubbed versions. Also, there has been an effort to impose dubbing by Nova TV, with \"La Fea Más Bella\" translated as \"Ružna ljepotica\" (literally, \"The Ugly Beauty\"), a Mexican telenovela, but it failed. Some of Croatian dubbing is also broadcast in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\n\nIn Slovenia, all foreign films and television programs are subtitled with the exception of children's movies and TV shows (both animated or live-action). While dubbed versions are always shown in cinemas and later on TV channels, cinemas will sometimes play subtitled versions of children's movies as well.\n\nIn Portugal, dubbing was banned under a 1948 law as a way of protecting the domestic film industry and reduce the access to culture as most of the population was illiterate. Until 1994, animated movies, as well as other TV series for children shown in Portugal, have imported Brazilian Portuguese dubs due to the lack of interest from Portuguese companies in the dubbing industry. This lack of interest was justified, since there were already quality dubbed copies of shows and movies in Portuguese made by Brazilians. \"The Lion King\" was the first feature film to be dubbed in European Portuguese rather than strictly Brazilian Portuguese. Currently, all movies for children are dubbed in European Portuguese. Subtitles are preferred in Portugal, used in every foreign-language documentary, TV series and film. The exception to this preference is when children are the target audience.\n\nWhile on TV, children's shows and movies are always dubbed, in cinemas, films with a clear juvenile target can be found in two versions, one dubbed (identified by the letters V.P. for \"versão portuguesa\" - \"Portuguese version\") and another subtitled version (V.O. for \"versão original\" - \"original version\"). This duality applies only to juvenile films. Others use subtitles only. While the quality of these dubs is recognized (some have already received international recognition and prizes), original versions with subtitles are usually preferred by the adults (\"Bee Movie\", for example). Dubbing cartoons aimed at adults (such as \"The Simpsons\" or \"South Park\") is less common. When \"The Simpsons Movie\" debuted in Portugal, most cinemas showed both versions (V.O. and V.P.), but in some small cities, cinemas decided to offer only the Portuguese version, a decision that led to public protest. Presently, live action series and movies are always shown in their original language format with Portuguese subtitles. Television programs for young children (such as \"Power Rangers\", \"Goosebumps\", \"Big Bad Beetleborgs\", etc.) are dubbed into European Portuguese. Some video games aimed at adults (such as God of War III, Halo 3, Assassin's Creed III and inFamous 2) are dubbed in European Portuguese, although there they provide an option to select the original language.\n\nIn Greece, most cartoon films have dubs. Usually when a movie has a Greek dub the dub is shown in cinemas but subtitled versions are shown as well. Foreign TV shows for adults are shown in their original versions with subtitles, most cartoons, for example, \"The Flintstones\" and \"The Jetsons\" were always dubbed, while \"Family Guy\" and \"American Dad!\" are always subtitled and contain the original English dialogue, since they are mostly for adults rather than children, (even though the movie \"Space Jam\" was subtitled instead dubbed, since also this is suitable for children). Also some Japanese anime series are dubbed in Greek (such as Pokémon, Pichi Pichi Pitch, Sailor Moon etc.) The only television programs dubbed in Greek includes Mexican TV series (like \"Rubí\" and \"La usurpadora\") and teen series (like \"Hannah Montana\" and \"The Suite Life of Zack & Cody\"). However, when Skai TV was re-launched in April 2006, the network opted for dubbing almost all foreign shows in Greek, unlike other Greek channels which had always broadcast most of the programs in their original language with subtitles.\n\nIn the Nordic countries, dubbing is used only in animated features and other films for young audiences. Some theaters in the major cities may also screen the original version, usually as the last showing of the day, or in a smaller auditorium in a multiplex.\n\nIn television programs with off-screen narration, the original audio is dubbed in their native language, while on-screen voices are usually subtitled.\n\nThe Nordic countries are often treated as a common market issuing DVD and Blu-ray releases with original audio and user choosable subtitle options in Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish. The covers often have text in all four languages as well, but are sometimes unique for each country. Some releases may include other European language audio and/or subtitles (i.e. German, Greek, Hungarian or Italian). Children's films typically have Nordic audio tracks in all four languages, as well as original audio in most cases.\n\nIn Finland, the dubbed version from Sweden may also be available at certain cinemas for children of the 5% Swedish-speaking minority, but only in cities or towns with a significant percentage of Swedish speakers. Most DVD and Blu-ray releases usually only have the original audio, except for children's films, which have both Finnish and Swedish language tracks, in addition to the original audio and subtitles in both languages.\n\nIn Iceland, the dubbed version of film and TV is usually Danish with some translated into Icelandic, LazyTown, an Icelandic TV show originally broadcast in English, was dubbed into Icelandic, amongst thirty-two other languages, and it remains the TV show to have been dubbed into the most languages.\n\nIn movie theaters, films for adult audiences have both Finnish and Swedish subtitles, the Finnish printed in basic font and the Swedish printed below the Finnish in a cursive font. In the early ages of television, foreign TV shows and movies were dubbed by one actor in Finland, as in Russian Gavrilov translation. Later, subtitles became a practice on Finnish television. Dubbing of films other than children's films is unpopular in Finland, as in many other countries. A good example is \"The Simpsons Movie\". While the original version was well-received, the Finnish-dubbed version received poor reviews, with some critics even calling it a disaster. On the other hand, many dubs of Disney animated features have been well-received, both critically and by the public.\n\nIn Estonia, films are shown in the original language with subtitles at cinemas. Subtitles are usually presented in both Estonian and Russian languages. Cartoons and animated series voiced by dubbing and voice-over translation (one-two actors) and live-action films and television series only with Estonian subtitles. Animated films are commonly shown in both the original language and dubbed into Estonian (or Russian in many cinemas). Most Estonian-language television channels use subtitles for foreign-language films and TV channels. However, Russian language channels tend to use dubbing more often, especially for Russian channels broadcast from Russia (as opposed to Russian channels broadcast from Estonia).\n\nIn Latvia and Lithuania, dubbing and voice-over translation is hugely popular on television. Almost all movies, TV series, cartoons and animated series voiced by voice-over translation (one-two actors). While the voice-over plays at a low volume in the background. In cinemas, only children's animated films are dubbed, and live-action films with Latvian and Lithuanian subtitles. But some other kids shows, like \"SpongeBob SquarePants\", use the voice-over translation.\n\nIn the Italian, French, German, Spanish, Turkish, Hungarian, Albanian, Slovak, Czech, Russian and Ukrainian language-speaking markets of Europe, almost all foreign films and television shows are dubbed (the exception being the majority of theatrical releases of adult-audience movies in Slovakia and Czech Republic, and high-profile videos in Russia). There are few opportunities to watch foreign movies in their original versions. In Spain, Italy, Germany and Austria, even in the largest cities, there are few cinemas that screen original versions with subtitles, or without any translation. However, digital pay-TV programming is often available in the original language, including the latest movies. Prior to the rise of DVDs, which in these countries are mostly issued with multi-language audio tracks, original-language films (those in languages other than the country's official language) were rare, whether in theaters, on TV, or on home video, and subtitled versions were considered a product for small niche markets such as intellectual or art films.\n\nThe first movie dubbed in Albanian language was \"The Great Warrior Skanderbeg\" in 1954 and since then, there have been thousands of popular titles dubbed in Albanian by different dubbing studios. All animated movies and children's programs are dubbed into Albanian language and so were the live-action movies until 2010 when they stopped dubbing them, except for children movies that contained CGI. From this year, all live-action movies and TV series contained subtitles. However, in 2016 the company announced that they are going to start with the live-action dubbing once again after months of auditions. TV series nevertheless were not dubbed, they were always subtitled except for a few Mexican, Brazilian and Turkish soap operas, like: \"Por Ti\", \"Celebridade\", \"A Casa das Sete Mulheres\", \"Paramparça\", etc. As for documentaries, Albania usually uses voice-over.\n\nVoice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in Albanian language can be enlisted here.\nThe Germanophone dubbing market is the largest in Europe. Germany has the most foreign-movie-dubbing studios per capita and per given area in the world. In Germany, Austria, and the German-speaking part of Switzerland, practically all films, shows, television series and foreign soap operas are shown in dubbed versions created for the German market. However, in some of Switzerland's towns and cities (particularly along the language-borders), subtitled versions are common. Dubbing films is a traditional and common practice in German-speaking Europe, since subtitles are not accepted and used as much as in other European countries. According to a European study, Austria is the country with the highest rejection rate (more than 70 percent) of subtitles, followed by Italy, Spain and Germany.\nIn German-speaking markets, computer and video games feature German text menus and are dubbed into the German language if speaking parts exist.\n\nIn recent years, Swiss and Austrian television stations have been showing increasing numbers of movies, series and TV-programmes in \"dual sound,\" which means the viewer can choose between the original language (e.g. English) and the language of the channel (German, French or Italian, according to the location).\n\nAlthough German-speaking voice actors play only a secondary role, they are still notable for providing familiar voices to well-known actors. Famous foreign actors are known and recognized for their German voice, and the German audience is used to them, so dubbing is also a matter of authenticity. However, in larger cities, there are theaters where movies can be seen in their original versions, as English has become somewhat more popular among young educated viewers. On German mainstream television, films are never broadcast with subtitles, but pay-per-view programming is often available in the original language. Subtitled niche and art films are sometimes aired on smaller networks.\n\nGerman-dubbed versions sometimes diverge greatly from the original, especially in adding humorous elements to the original. In extreme cases, such as \"The Persuaders!\", the dubbed version was more successful than the English original. Often, translation adds sexually explicit gags the U.S. versions might not be allowed to use. For example, in \"Bewitched\", the translators changed \"\"The Do Not Disturb sign will hang on the door tonight\"\" to \"\"The only hanging thing tonight will be the Do Not Disturb sign\"\".\n\nSome movies dubbed in Austria diverge from the German Standard version in addressing other people but only when the movies are dubbed into certain Austrian dialect versions. (Mr. and Mrs. are translated into Herr and Frau which is usually not translated in order to be in lip-sync).\nSometimes even English pronounced first names are translated and are pronounced into the correct German equivalent (English name \"Bert\" became Southern German pronounced name \"Bertl\" which is an abbreviation of \"Berthold\".)\n\nSome movies dubbed before reunification exist in different versions for the east and the west. They use different translations, and often differ in the style of dubbing.\n\nGerman dubbing voice artists of actors are enlisted here.\nIn France, movies and TV series are, except purely arthouse films, always released in the dubbed French language version. The original language version of the film with French subtitles is released in designated theaters which show only subtitled versions or both versions are shown at different times or split screenings between both versions. However, dubbing is the norm and subtitling is only for niche audience and movies with subtitles are usually very small arthouse films with very limited commercial prospects for pay and free TV airings and also home entertainment (VOD, DVD,). Dubbing in the French Language is thus absolutely essential for any sale to be made.\n\nSince the digitalization of even now the over-the -air television broadcaster, both versions are however offered to the customer simultaneously.\nBy default, foreign films and TV programmes shown on television are dubbed into French on a channel's main audio feed. However, with the advent of digital television, viewers can access the original language feed for some programmes, as well as matching subtitles. \nMost movies are released nationwide in dubbed version and subtitled versions where available with the exception of very limited often micro-budget arthouse productions that do stem come from the \"hollywood movie production\" machine which are exclusively arthouse films and not dubbed at the time of their theatrical release.\nTheaters showing these kind of movies or also showing commercial films in the original language version with French subtitles are very rare outside of the big cities and most of them are located in Paris which has the most \"cinephile\" cinemas in France. Often these \"niche\" films are only released in Paris region.\n\nA theater showing subtitled versions of original language movies are typically well known for this and will advertise this also on the poster advising moviegoers that the film is shown in an original language version (usually abbreviated VO [\"version originale\"] or VOST [\"version originale sous-titrée\"]), as opposed to VF [\"version française\"], the latter then becoming what is known and used also in the neighboring countries like Belgium or Switzerland, as the \"FRENCH LANGUAGE VERSION\" of the film.)\n\nBecause the alterations made to the original film are so profound, making it no longer viewable or understandable for audiences that speak the language the film was originally shot in, the final dubbed version is called the \"French language version\", as supposed to the use of subtitles which leaves the film in its original state.\nThe choice to dub or not at the time of theatrical release is a decision made by the distributor releasing the film based upon his recoupment strategy for the film and his prognosis of the commercial prospects and given the fact a dub is needed for home entertainment and TV sales, only very small arthouse films are never dubbed.\nOnly a very small percentage (according to the official institute CNC in France only 16.4% of all ticket-sales where for movies watched in the original language version with subtitles) and this is counting Blockbusters and others shown in their original language version with subtitles and the small number of films that are never dubbed.\nVoice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in the European French language can be viewed here.\nIn Italy, dubbing is systematic, with a tradition going back to the 1930s in Rome, Milan, Florence and Turin. In Mussolini's fascist Italy, release of foreign languages movies was banned for political reasons. Rome is the principal base of the dubbing industry, where major productions such as movies, drama, documentaries and some cartoons are dubbed. However, dubbing in Milan is mostly of cartoons and some minor productions. Practically every foreign film (mostly American ones) of every genre, for children or adults, as well as TV shows, are dubbed into Italian. In big cities, original-version movies can also be seen in some theaters but it is not so common. Subtitles may be available on late-night programs on mainstream TV channels, and on pay-TV all movies are available in the original language with Italian subtitles, many shows featuring their original soundtracks.\n\nEarly in their careers, actors such as Alberto Sordi or Nino Manfredi worked extensively as dubbing actors. At one point, common practice in Italian cinema was to shoot scenes MOS (motor only sync or motor only shot) and dub the dialogue in post-production. A notable example of this practice is \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\", in which all actors had to dub in their own voices.\n\nVideo games are generally either dubbed into Italian (for instance Assassin's Creed saga, Halo or Harry Potter series etc.) or released with original-speaking tracks but with all the texts translated into Italian language.\n\nA list of the voice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in Italian can be enlisted here.\nIn Spain, practically all foreign television programs are shown dubbed in European Spanish, as are most films. Some dubbing actors have achieved popularity for their voices, such as Constantino Romero (who dubs Clint Eastwood, Darth Vader and Arnold Schwarzenegger's Terminator, among others) and Óscar Muñoz (the official European Spanish dub-over voice artist for Elijah Wood and Hayden Christensen).\n\nIn some communities such as Catalonia, many or most foreign programs are also dubbed into their own languages, different from European Spanish. Currently, with the spread of digital terrestrial television, viewers can choose between the original and the dubbed soundtracks for most movies and television.\nFilms from Spanish-speaking America are shown in their original language, while strong regional accents (from the Americas or from Spain) may be subtitled in news and documentaries.\n\nIn the Czech Republic generally all foreign films released on home media are provided with Czech dubbing. All television channels (both free and paid) broadcast foreign films and series dubbed - with only very rare exceptions. Films in cinemas are usually provided only with subtitles, but some films like family films, films aimed at a young audience, and major film series (especially those in 3D) are also dubbed, and a subtitled version is available only in a few cinemas. It is also common for well-known foreign actors to be dubbed by one individual Czech voice actor; for instance Clint Eastwood has been dubbed by Ladislav Županič in 39 of 42 films distributed in the Czech Republic.\n\nIn the Slovakia home media market, Czech dubbed versions are widely used, with only children's films and some few exceptions (for example Independence Day) that have been dubbed for cinema being released with Slovak dubbing. Czech dubbing was also extensively used in the broadcast of Slovak television channels, but since 2007 Slovak language laws require any newer shows to be provided with Slovak localization (dubbing or subtitles); since then, television broadcasts of newer films and shows have been dubbed into Slovak.\n\nIn Hungary, dubbing is almost universally common. Almost every foreign movie or TV show released in Hungary is dubbed into Hungarian. The history of dubbing dates back to the 1950s, when the country was still under communist rule. One of the most iconic Hungarian dubs was of the American cartoon \"The Flintstones\", with a local translation by József Romhányi. The Internetes Szinkron Adatbázis (ISzDB) is the largest Hungarian database for film dubs, with information for many live action and animated films. On page 59 of the Eurobarometer, 84% of Hungarians said that they prefer dubbing over subtitles.\n\nIn the socialist era, every film was dubbed with professional and mostly popular actors. Care was taken to make sure the same voice actor would lend his voice to the same original actor. In the early 1990s, as cinemas tried to keep up with showing newly released films, subtitling became dominant in the cinema. This, in turn, forced TV channels to make their own cheap versions of dubbed soundtracks for the movies they presented, resulting in a constant degrading of dubbing quality. Once this became customary, cinema distributors resumed the habit of dubbing for popular productions, presenting them in a below-average quality. However, every feature is presented with the original soundtrack in at least one cinema in large towns and cities.\n\nHowever, in Hungary, most documentary films and series (for example, those on Discovery Channel, National Geographic Channel) are made with voiceovers. Some old movies and series, or ones that provide non-translatable jokes and conversations (for example, the \"Mr. Bean\" television series), are shown only with subtitles.\n\nThere is a more recent problem arising from dubbing included on DVD releases. Many generations have grown up with an original (and, by current technological standards, outdated) soundtrack, which is either technologically (mono or bad quality stereo sound) or legally (expired soundtrack license) unsuitable for a DVD release. Many original features are released on DVD with a new soundtrack, which in some cases proves to be extremely unpopular, thus forcing DVD producers to include the original soundtrack. In some rare cases, the Hungarian soundtrack is left out altogether. This happens notably with Warner Home Video Hungary, which ignored the existence of Hungarian soundtracks completely, as they did not want to pay the licenses for the soundtracks to be included on their new DVD releases, which appear with improved picture quality, but very poor subtitling.\n\nIn Poland, cinema releases for general audiences are almost exclusively subtitled, with the exception of children's movies, and television screenings of movies, as well as made-for-TV shows. These are usually shown with voice-over, where a voice talent reads a translation over the original soundtrack. This method, called \"juxtareading,\" is similar to the so-called Gavrilov translation in Russia, with one difference—all dialogues are voiced by one lector, preferably with a deep and neutral voice which does not interfere with the pitch of voice of the original speakers in the background. To some extent, it resembles live translation. Certain highly qualified voice talents are traditionally assigned to particular kinds of production, such as action or drama. Standard dubbing is not widely popular with most audiences, with the exception of cartoons and children's shows, which are dubbed also for TV releases.\n\nIt is claimed that, until around 1951, there were no revoiced foreign movies available in Poland. Instead, they were exclusively subtitled in Polish.\n\nPoland's dubbing traditions began between the two world wars. In 1931, among the first movies dubbed into Polish were \"Dangerous Curves\" (1929), \"The Dance of Life\" (1929), \"Paramount on Parade\" (1930), and \"Darling of the Gods\" (1930). In 1949, the first dubbing studio opened in Łódź. The first film dubbed that year was \"Russkiy Vopros\" (filmed 1948).\n\nPolish dubbing in the first post-war years suffered from poor synchronization. Polish dialogues were not always audible and the cinema equipment of those time often made films sound less clear than they were. In the 1950s, Polish publicists discussed the quality of Polish versions of foreign movies.\n\nThe number of dubbed movies and the quality improved. Polish dubbing had a golden age between the 1960s and the 1980s. Approximately a third of foreign movies screened in cinemas were dubbed. The \"Polish dubbing school\" was known for its high quality. In that time, Poland had some of the best dubbing in the world. The person who initiated high-quality dubbing versions was director Zofia Dybowska-Aleksandrowicz. In that time, dubbing in Poland was very popular. Polish television dubbed popular films and TV series such as \"Rich Man, Poor Man\"; \"Fawlty Towers\", \"Forsyte Saga\", \"Elizabeth R\", \"I, Claudius\", \"I'll Take Manhattan\", and \"Peter the Great\".\n\nIn the 1980s, due to budget cuts, state-run TV saved on tapes by voicing films over live during transmission.\n\nOverall, during 1948-1998, almost 1,000 films were dubbed in Polish. In the 1990s, dubbing films and TV series continued, although often also for one emission only.\n\nIn 1995, Canal+ was launched in Poland. In its first years, it dubbed 30% of its schedule dubbing popular films and TV series, one of the best-known and popular dubbings was that of \"Friends\", but this proved unsuccessful. It stopped dubbing films in 1999, although many people supported the idea of dubbing and bought the access only for dubbing versions of foreign productions. In the 1990s, dubbing was done by the television channel known as Wizja Jeden. They mainly dubbed BBC productions such as \"The League of Gentlemen\", \"Absolutely Fabulous\" and \"Men Behaving Badly\". Wizja Jeden was closed in 2001. In the same year, TVP stopped dubbing the TV series \"Frasier\", although that dubbing was very popular.\n\nCurrently, dubbing of films and TV series for teenagers is made by Nickelodeon and Disney Channel. One of the major breakthroughs in dubbing was the Polish release of \"Shrek\", which contained many references to local culture and Polish humour. Since then, people seem to have grown to like dubbed versions more, and pay more attention to the dubbing actors. However, this seems to be the case only with animated films, as live-action dubbing is still considered a bad practice. In the case of DVD releases, most discs contain both the original soundtrack and subtitles, and either voice over or dubbed Polish track. The dubbed version is, in most cases, the one from the theater release, while voice-over is provided for movies that were only subtitled in theaters.\n\nSince theatrical release of \"The Avengers\" in May 2012, Walt Disney Company Polska dubs all films for cinema releases. Also in 2012, United International Pictures Polska dubbed \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", while Forum Film Polska – former distributor of Disney's films – decided to dub \"\", along with its . However, when a dub is produced but the film's target audience is not exclusively children, both dubbed and subtitled versions are usually available in movie theaters. The dubbed versions are more commonly shown in morning and early afternoon hours, with the subtitled version dominating in the evening. Both can be available in parallel at similar hours in multiplexes.\n\nIn the Russia, is generally dubbed, but in the cases using voice-over dub technique with only a couple of voice actors, with the original speech still audible underneath. In the Soviet Union, most foreign movies to be officially released were dubbed. Voice-over dub was invented in the Soviet Union in the 1980s when with the fall of the regime, many popular foreign movies, previously forbidden, or at least questionable under communist rule, started to flood in, in the form of low-quality home-copied videos. Being unofficial releases, they were dubbed in a very primitive way. For example, the translator spoke the text directly over the audio of a video being copied, using primitive equipment. The quality of the resulting dub was very low, the translated phrases were off-sync, interfering with the original voices, background sounds leaked into the track, translation was inaccurate and, most importantly, all dub voices were made by a single person who usually lacked the intonation of the original, making comprehension of some scenes quite difficult. This method of translation exerted a strong influence on Russian pop culture. Voices of translators became recognizable for generations. In modern Russia, the overdubbing technique is still used in many cases, although with vastly improved quality, and now with multiple voice actors dubbing different original voices. Video games are generally either dubbed into Russian (for instance \"The Legend of Spyro\" trilogy, \"Skylanders\" series, \"Assassin's Creed\" saga, \"Halo\" or \"Harry Potter\" series etc.) or released with original-speaking tracks but with all the texts translated into Russian language. Releases of cinemas are almost always dubbed in the Russian language. On films, TV series, cartoons and animated series are shown as a dubbing and voiceover. Subtitles are not used at all.\n\nIn the Ukraine, in the period from the beginning of the 1990s and utill 2006, films in Ukrainian cinema, as well as during the colonial stay of Ukraine within the USSR, continued to be issued with dubbing in Russian. In spite of the absence of Ukrainian dubbing in the Ukrainian cinema, in this period there were still some dubbing in Ukrainian. In the end, in spite of the isolated cases of dubbing films in Ukrainian during this period, massive dubbing of dubbing films in Ukrainian does not take place until. In 2006, all cinema releases are almost always dubbed into Ukrainian with the overdubbing technique and multiple voice actors dubbing different original voices. For television, TV channels usually release movies, TV series, cartoons and animated series with a Ukrainian dubbing and voiceover, although certain high-profile movies and TV shows are dubbed rather than voice-overed. Soviet and russian films, TV series, cartoons, animated series and TV programs are usually not dubbed but are accompanied by Ukrainian subtitles.\n\nIn the United States and most of Canada outside Quebec, foreign films shown in theaters (such as \"Metropolis\" and \"\") are usually subtitled. The exceptions are tokusatsu and daikaiju films, which are dubbed when imported into the U.S. However, the poor quality of the dubbing of these films has become the subject of mockery. A small number of British films have been dubbed when released in America due to dialects used with which Americans are not familiar (for example, \"Kes\" and \"Trainspotting\"). In addition, British children's shows (such as \"Bob the Builder\") are re-dubbed with American voice actors, making the series more understandable for American children. Conversely, British programs shown in Canada are not re-dubbed.\n\nTelevised Japanese anime is almost always aired in its dubbed format, regardless of its content or target age group. The exceptions to this practice are either when an English dub has not been produced for the program (usually in the case of feature films) or when the program is being presented by a network that places importance on presenting it in its original format (as was the case when Turner Classic Movies aired several of Hayao Miyazaki's works, which were presented both dubbed and subtitled). Most anime DVDs contain options for original Japanese, Japanese with subtitles, and English-dubbed, except for a handful of series that have been heavily edited or Americanized. In addition, Disney has a policy that makes its directors undergo stages to perfect alignment of certain lip movements so the movie looks believable.\n\nFor Spanish-speaking countries, all foreign-language programs, films, cartoons and documentaries shown on free-to-air TV networks are dubbed into Standard Spanish, while broadcasts on cable and satellite pan-regional channels are either dubbed or subtitled. In theaters, children's movies and most blockbuster films are dubbed into Standard Spanish or Mexican Spanish, and are sometimes further dubbed into regional dialects of Spanish where they are released.\n\nIn Mexico, by law, films shown in theaters must be shown in their original version. Films in languages other than Spanish are usually subtitled. Only educational documentaries and movies rated for children, as well as some movies that are expected to have a wide audience (for example, \"\" or \"The Avengers\") may be dubbed, but this is not compulsory, and some animated films are shown in theaters in both dubbed and subtitled versions (for instance, some DreamWorks productions). Nonetheless, a recent trend in several cinemas is to offer the dubbed versions only, with a stark decrease in the showing of the original ones.\n\nDubbing must be made in Mexico by Mexican nationals or foreigners residing in Mexico. Still, several programs that are shown on pay TV are dubbed in other countries like Venezuela, Chile or Colombia.\n\nMost movies released on DVD feature neutral Spanish as a language option, and sometimes feature a specific dub for Mexican audiences (for example, \"Rio\"). Foreign programs are dubbed on broadcast TV, while on pay TV most shows and movies are subtitled. It must be noted, however, that in a similar way to cinemas, in the last few years many channels on pay TV have begun to broadcast programs and films only in their dubbed version.\n\nDubbing became very popular in the 1990s with the rise in popularity of anime in Mexico. Some voice actors have become celebrities and are always identified with specific characters, such as Mario Castañeda (who became popular by dubbing Goku in \"Dragon Ball Z\") or Humberto Vélez (who dubbed Homer Simpson in the first 15 seasons of \"The Simpsons\").\n\nThe popularity of pay TV has allowed people to view several series in their original language rather than dubbed. Dubbing has been criticized for the use of TV or movie stars as voice actors (such as Ricky Martin on Disney's \"Hercules\", or Eugenio Derbez on DreamWorks' \"Shrek\"), or for the incorrect use of local popular culture that sometimes creates unintentional jokes or breaks the feeling of the original work (such as translating Sheldon Cooper's \"Bazinga!\" to \"¡Vacilón!\").\n\nSeveral video games have been dubbed into neutral Spanish, rather than European Spanish, in Mexico (such as the \"Gears of War\" series, \"Halo 3\", \"Infamous 2\" and others). Sony recently announced that more games (such as \"God of War: Ascension\") will be dubbed into neutral Spanish.\n\nIn Peru, all foreign series, movies, and animated programming are shown dubbed in Latin American Spanish, with dubs imported from Mexico, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela on terrestrial and pay-television. All movies intended for kids are being offered as dub-only movies, while films aimed at older audiences are being offered dubbed and subtitled in Spanish. Pay-TV channels show both dubbed and subtitled version of every film they broadcast, being offered with a separate subtitle track and a second audio track in English. Peru doesn't produce their own dubs since dubbing studios never existed in that country. However, there is an increase of people preferring subtitle films and series rather than dubbed starting the late-2000s, as Peruvians viewers tend to get used to their original version.\n\nIn Brazil, foreign programs are invariably dubbed into Brazilian Portuguese on broadcast TV, with only a few exceptions. Films shown at cinemas are generally offered with both subtitled and dubbed versions, with dubbing frequently being the only choice for children's movies. Subtitling was primarily for adult audience movies until 2012. Since then, dubbed versions also became available for all ages. As a result, in recent years, more cinemas have opened in Brazil, attracting new audiences to the cinema who prefer dubbing.\n\nIn the 90's, with Saint Seiya, Dragon Ball and other anime shows becoming popular in Brazilian TV's, the voice actors and the dubbing career gained a higher space in Brazilian culture. Actors like Hermes Baroli (Brazilian dubber of Pegasus Seiya, in \"Saint Seiya\" and actors like Ashton Kutcher), Marco Ribeiro (Brazilian dubber of many actors like Tom Hanks, Jim Carrey and Robert Downey Jr., and Yusuke Urameshi from the anime \"Yu Yu Hakusho\") and Wendel Bezerra (Brazilian dubber of Goku in \"Dragon Ball Z\" and SpongeBob in \"SpongeBob SquarePants\") are recognized for their most notable roles.\n\nPay TV commonly offers both dubbed and subtitled movies, with statistics showing that dubbed versions are becoming predominant. Most DVD and Blu-ray releases usually feature Portuguese, Spanish, and the original audio along with subtitles in native languages. Most video games are dubbed in Brazilian Portuguese rather than having European Portuguese dubs alone. Games such as \"Halo 3\", \"\", \"inFamous 2\", \"Assassin's Creed III\", \"\", \"World of Warcraft\" and others are dubbed in Brazilian Portuguese. This is because despite the dropping of the dubbing law in Portugal in 1994, most companies in that country use the Brazilian Portuguese because of traditional usage during the days of the dubbing rule, along with these dubbings being more marketable than European Portuguese.\n\nA list that showcases Brazilian Portuguese voice artists that dub for actors and actresses are displayed here. However, there can also be different official dub artists for certain regions within Brazil.\nApparently, for unknown reasons (probably technical), the Brazilian Portuguese dub credits from some shows or cartoons from channels from Viacom or Turner/TimeWarner, are shown on Latin America (on Spanish-dubbed series).\n\nIn Quebec, Canada, most films and TV programs in English are dubbed into Standard French, occasionally with Quebec French idiosyncrasies. Occasionally, the dubbing of a series or a movie, such as \"The Simpsons\", is made using the more widely spoken \"joual\" variety of Quebec French. Dubbing has the advantage of making children's films and TV series more comprehensible to younger audiences. However, many bilingual Québécois prefer subtitling, since they would understand some or all of the original audio. In addition, all films are shown in English, as well in certain theaters (especially in major cities and English-speaking areas such as the West Island), and some theatres, such as the Scotiabank Cinema Montreal, show only movies in English. Most American television series are only available in English on DVD, or on English-language channels, but some of the more popular ones have French dubs shown on mainstream networks, and are released in French on DVD as well, sometimes separately from an English-only version.\n\nFormerly, all French-language dubbed films in Quebec were imported from France and some still are. Such a practice was criticized by former politician Mario Dumont after he took his children to see the Parisian French dub of \"Shrek the Third\", which Dumont found incomprehensible. After his complaints and a proposed bill, \"Bee Movie\", the film from DreamWorks Animation, was dubbed in Quebec, making it the studio's first animated film to have a Quebec French dub, as all DreamWorks Animation films had previously been dubbed in France. In terms of Disney, the first Disney animated movie to be dubbed in Quebec was \"Oliver and Company.\" The Disney Renaissance films were also dubbed in Quebec except for \"The Rescuers Down Under, Beauty and the Beast, and The Lion King.\"\n\nIn addition, because Canadian viewers usually find Quebec French more comprehensible than other dialects of the language, some older film series that had the French-language versions of previous installments dubbed in France have had later ones dubbed in Quebec, often creating inconsistencies within the French version of the series' canon. Lucasfilm's \"Star Wars\" and \"Indiana Jones\" series are examples. Both series had films released in the 1970s and 1980s, with no Québécois French dubbed versions; instead, the Parisian French versions, with altered character and object names and terms, were distributed in the province. However, later films in both series released 1999 and later were dubbed in Quebec, using different voice actors and \"reversing\" name changes made in France's dubbings due to the change in studio.\n\nChina has a long tradition of dubbing foreign films into Mandarin Chinese, starting in the 1930s. While during the Republic of China era Western motion pictures may have been imported and dubbed into Chinese, since 1950 Soviet movies, dubbed primarily in Shanghai, became the main import. Beginning in the late 1970s, in addition to films, popular TV series from the United States, Japan, Brazil, and Mexico were also dubbed. The Shanghai Film Dubbing Studio has been the most well-known studio in the film dubbing industry in China. In order to generate high-quality products, they divide each film into short segments, each one lasting only a few minutes, and then work on the segments one-by-one. In addition to the correct meaning in translation, they make tremendous effort to match the lips of the actors to the dialogue. As a result, the dubbing in these films generally is not readily detected. The cast of dubbers is acknowledged at the end of a dubbed film. Several dubbing actors and actresses of the Shanghai Film Dubbing Studio have become well-known celebrities, such as Qiu Yuefeng, Bi Ke, Li Zi, and Liu Guangning. In recent years, however, especially in the larger cities on the east and south coasts, it has become increasingly common for movie theaters to show subtitled versions with the original soundtracks intact.\n\nMotion pictures are also dubbed into the languages of some of China's autonomous regions. Notably, the Translation Department of the Tibetan Autonomous Region Movie Company (西藏自治区电影公司译制科) has been dubbing movies into the Tibetan language since the 1960s. In the early decades, it would dub 25 to 30 movies each year, the number rising to 60-75 by the early 2010s.\nMotion pictures are dubbed for China's Mongol- and Uyghur-speaking markets as well.\n\nTaiwan dubs some foreign films and TV series in Mandarin Chinese. Until the mid-1990s, the major national terrestrial channels both dubbed and subtitled all foreign programs and films and, for some popular programs, the original voices were offered in Second audio program. Gradually, however, both terrestrial and cable channels stopped dubbing for prime time U.S. shows and films, while subtitling continued.\n\nIn the 2000s, the dubbing practice has differed depending on the nature and origin of the program. Animations, children's shows and some educational programs on PTS are mostly dubbed. English live-action movies and shows are not dubbed in theaters or on television. Japanese TV dramas are no longer dubbed, while Korean dramas, Hong Kong dramas and dramas from other Asian countries are still often dubbed. Korean variety shows are not dubbed. Japanese and Korean films on Asian movie channels are still dubbed. In theaters, most foreign films are not dubbed, while animated films and some films meant for children offer a dubbed version. Hong Kong live-action films have a long tradition of being dubbed into Mandarin, while more famous films offer a Cantonese version.\n\nIn Hong Kong, foreign television programmes, except for English-language and Mandarin television programmes, are dubbed in Cantonese. English-language and Mandarin programmes are generally shown in their original with subtitles. Foreign films, such as most live-action and animated films (such as anime and Disney), are usually dubbed in Cantonese. However most cinemas also offer subtitled versions of English-language films.\n\nFor the most part, foreign films and TV programmes, both live-action and animated, are generally dubbed in both Mandarin and Cantonese. For example, in \"The Lord of the Rings\" film series, Elijah Wood's character Frodo Baggins was dubbed into Mandarin by Jiang Guangtao for China and Taiwan. For the Cantonese localization, there were actually two dubs for Hong Kong and Macau. The first Cantonese dub, he was voiced by Leung Wai Tak, with a second Cantonese dub released, he was voiced by Bosco Tang.\n\nA list for Mandarin and Cantonese voice artists that dub for actors are shown here.\n\nIn Israel, only children's movies and TV programming are dubbed in Hebrew. In programs aimed at teenagers and adults, dubbing is rarely considered for translation, not only because of its high costs, but also because the audience is mainly multi-lingual. Most viewers in Israel speak at least one European language in addition to Hebrew, and a large part of the audience also speaks Arabic. Therefore, most viewers prefer to hear the original soundtrack, aided by Hebrew subtitles. Another problem is that dubbing does not allow for translation into two different languages simultaneously, as is often the case of Israeli television channels that use subtitles in Hebrew and another language (like Russian) simultaneously.\n\nIn Japan, many television programs appear on Japanese television subtitled or dubbed if they are intended for children. When the American film \"Morocco\" was released in Japan in 1931, subtitles became the mainstream method of translating TV programs and films in Japan. Later, around the 1950s, foreign television programs and films began to be shown dubbed in Japanese on television. The first foreign cartoon to be dubbed into Japanese were the 1940s Superman cartoons in 1955.\n\nDue to the lack of video software for domestic television, video software was imported from abroad. When the television program was shown on television, it was mostly dubbed. There was a character limit for a small TV screen at a lower resolution, and this method was not suitable for the poor elderly and illiterate eye, as was audio dubbing. Presently, TV shows and movies (both those aimed at all ages and adults-only) are shown dubbed with the original language and Japanese subtitles, while providing the original language option when the same film is released on VHS, DVD and Blu-ray.\n\nAdult cartoons such as \"Family Guy\", \"South Park\", and \"The Simpsons\" are shown dubbed in Japanese on the WOWOW TV channel. \"\" was dubbed in Japanese by different actors instead of the same Japanese dubbing-actors from the cartoon because it was handled by a different Japanese dubbing studio, and it was marketed for the Kansai market. In Japanese theaters, foreign-language movies, except those intended for children, are usually shown in their original version with Japanese subtitles. Foreign films usually contain multiple Japanese-dubbing versions, but with several different original Japanese-dubbing voice actors, depending upon which TV station they are aired. NHK, Nippon TV, Fuji TV, TV Asahi, and TBS usually follow this practice, as do software releases on VHS, Laserdisc, DVD and Blu-ray. As for recent foreign films being released, there are now some film theaters in Japan that show both dubbed and subtitled editions.\n\nOn 22 June 2009, 20th Century Fox's Japanese division has opened up a Blu-Ray lineup known as \"Emperor of Dubbing\", dedicated at having multiple Japanese dubs of popular English-language films (mostly Hollywood films) as well as retaining the original scripts, releasing them altogether in special Blu-Ray releases. These also feature a new dub created exclusively for that release as a director's cut, or a new dub made with a better surround sound mix to match that of the original English mix (as most older Japanese dubbings were made on mono mixes to be aired on TV). Other companies have followed practice, like Universal Pictures's Japanese division NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan opening up \"Reprint of Memories\", along with having \"Power of Dubbing\", which act in a similar way by re-packaging all the multiple Japanese dubs of popular films and putting them out as Special Blu-ray releases.\n\n\"Japanese dub-over artists\" provide the voices for certain performers, such as those listed in the following table:\n\nIn South Korea, anime that are imported from Japan are generally shown dubbed in Korean on television. However, some anime is censored, such as Japanese letters or content being edited for a suitable Korean audience. Western cartoons are dubbed in Korean as well, such as Nickelodeon cartoons like \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" and \"Danny Phantom\". Several English-language (mostly American) live-action films are dubbed in Korean, but they are not shown in theaters. Instead they are only broadcast on South Korean television networks (KBS, MBC, SBS, EBS), while DVD import releases of these films are shown with Korean subtitles. This may be due to the fact that the six American major film studios may not own any rights to the Korean dubs of their live-action films that the Korean television networks have dubbed and aired. Even if they don't own the rights, Korean or non-Korean viewers can record from Korean-dubbed live-action films from television broadcasting onto DVDs with DVRs.\n\nSometimes, video games are dubbed in Korean. Examples would be the \"Halo\" series, the \"Jak & Daxter\" series, and the \"God of War\" series. For the \"Halo\" games, Lee Jeong Gu provides his Korean voice to the main protagonist Master Chief (replacing Steve Downes's voice), while Kim So Hyeong voices Chieftain Tartarus, one of the main antagonists (replacing Kevin Michael Richardson's voice).\n\nThe following South Korean voice-over artists are usually identified with the following actors:\n\nIn Thailand, foreign television programs are dubbed in Thai, but the original soundtrack is often simultaneously carried on a NICAM audio track on terrestrial broadcast, and alternate audio tracks on satellite broadcast. Previously, terrestrial stations simulcasted the original soundtrack on the radio. On pay-TV, many channels carry foreign-language movies and television programs with subtitles. Movie theaters in Bangkok and some larger cities show both the subtitled version and the dubbed version of English-language movies. In big cities like Bangkok, Thai-language movies have English subtitles. \n\nThis list features a collection of Thai voice actors and actresses that have dubbed for these featured performers.\n\nUnlike movie theaters in most Asian countries, those in Indonesia show foreign movies with subtitles. Then a few years or months later, those movies appear on TV either dubbed in Indonesian or subtitled. Kids shows are mostly dubbed, even though in cartoon series, songs aren't dubbed, but in big movies such as Disney movies, both speaking and singing voice were cast for the new Indonesian dub even though it took maybe a few months or even years for the movie to come out. Adult films was mostly subtitled, but sometimes they can be dubbed as well, because there aren't many Indonesian voices, mostly in dubbed movies, three character can have exactly the same voice.\n\nReality shows never dubbed in Indonesian, because it was not a planned-interaction such as in movies, so if they appear in TV, it will be appear with subtitles on it.\n\nIn the Philippines, media practitioners generally have mixed practices regarding whether to dub television programmes or films, even within the same kind of medium.\n\nThe Filipino Dub is available in other countries.\n\nThe prevalence of media needing to be dubbed has resulted in a talent pool that is very capable of syncing voice to lip, especially for shows broadcast by the country's three largest networks. It is not uncommon in the Filipino dub industry to have most of the voices in a series dubbing by only a handful of voice talents. English-language programmes used to usually air in their original language in free-to-air television. However, since the late 1990s/early 2000s, more English-language programmes that air on major free-to-air networks (i.e. TV5, ABS-CBN, GMA) have been dubbed into Filipino. Even Studio 23 (now ABS-CBN Sports and Action) which used to show all of its foreign programmes in English, had adopted dubbing for some of its foreign programmes. Children's programmes from cable networks Nickelodeon, Cartoon Network, and Disney Channel shown on TV5 or ABS-CBN, have long been dubbed into Filipino or another Philippine regional language. Also animated Disney films are often dubbed in Filipino, except for the singing parts, which retains its original language. Dubbing is less common in smaller free-to-air networks such as ETC, 2nd Avenue and the former RPN and the original language version is aired. Also popular in the Philippines are Chinese, Korean, and Mexican dramas, which are called \"Chinovelas\", \"Koreanovelas\", and \"Mexicanovelas\", respectively. All of these dramas have always been dubbed in Filipino or another Philippine regional language, with its unique set of Filipino-speaking voice actors.\n\nThe original language version of TV programmes is also usually available on cable/satellite channels such as Star World, Fox, and AXN. However, some channels where foreign films or TV series are dubbed into Filipino have proliferated. Cinema One, ABS-CBN's cable movie channel, shows some films from abroad dubbed into Filipino. Nat Geo Wild airs most programs dubbed into Filipino for Philippine audiences, being one of the few cable channels to do so. Tagalized Movie Channel & Tag airs Hollywood and Asian movies dubbed in Filipino. Fox Filipino airs some English, Latin, and Asian series dubbed in Tagalog such as The Walking Dead, Devious Maids, La Teniente, Kdabra, and some selected programs from Channel M. GMA News TV airs some English-language documentaries, movies, and reality series dubbed in Filipino. The channel HERO TV, which focuses on anime and tokusatsu shows, dubs all its foreign programs into Filipino. This is in contrast to Animax, where their anime programs dubbed in English.\n\nForeign films especially English films shown in cinemas are almost always shown in their original language. Non-English films make use of English subtitles. Unlike other countries, children's films in English are not dubbed in cinemas.\n\nA list of voice actors with their associates that they dub into Tagalog are listed here. \nIn India, where \"foreign films\" are synonymous with \"Hollywood films\", dubbing is done mostly in three Indian languages, including Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. Dubbing of foreign languages is rarely done with the other major Indian languages, namely Malayalam and Bengali, due to the high literacy rate among the population who speak the languages. Despite this, some Kannada and Malayalam dubs of children television programs can be seen on Sun TV's channel. The finished works are released into the towns and lower tier settlements of the respective states (where English penetration is low), often with the English-language originals released in the metropolitan areas. In all other states, the English originals are released along with the dubbed versions, where often the dubbed version collections are more outstanding than the originals. \"Spider-Man 3\" was also done in the Bhojpuri language, a language popular in eastern India in addition to Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. \"A Good Day to Die Hard\", the most recent installment in the \"Die Hard\" franchise, was the first ever Hollywood film to receive a Punjabi language dub as well.\n\nMost TV channels mention neither the Indian-language dubbing credits, nor its staff, at the end of the original ending credits, since changing the credits casting for the original actors or voice actors involves a huge budget for modifying, making it somewhat difficult to find information for the dubbed versions. The same situation is encountered for films. Sometimes foreign programs and films receive more than one dub, such as for example, Jumanji, Dragonheart and Van Helsing having two Hindi dubs. Information for the Hindi, Tamil and Telugu voice actors who have done the voices for specific actors and for their roles on foreign films and television programs are published in local Indian data magazines, for those that are involved in the dubbing industry in India. But on a few occasions, there are some foreign productions that do credit the dubbing cast, such as animated films like the \"Barbie\" films, and some Disney films. Disney Channel original series released on DVD with their Hindi dubs show a list of the artists in the Hindi dub credits, after the original ending credits. Theatrical releases and VCD releases of foreign films do not credit the dubbing cast or staff. The DVD releases, however, do have credits for the dubbing staff, if they are released multilingual. As of recently, information for the dubbing staff of foreign productions have been expanding due to high demands of people wanting to know the knowledge of the voice actors behind characters in foreign works. Various big popular dubbing studios in India are featured such as Sound & Vision India, Main Frame Software Communications, Visual Reality, ZamZam Productions, Treasure Tower International, Blue Whale Entertainment, Jai Hand Entertainment, Sugar Mediaz, Rudra Sound Solutionz and more.\n\nFor a list of Indian voice-dubbing artists, click here. A few Indian dubbing artists are listed in the table below.\n\nIn Pakistan \"foreign films\", and cartoons are not normally dubbed locally. Instead, foreign films, anime and cartoons, such as those shown on Nickelodeon Pakistan and Cartoon Network Pakistan, are dubbed in Hindi in India, as Hindi and Urdu, the national language of Pakistan, are mutually intelligible.\nHowever, soap operas from Turkey are now dubbed in Urdu and have gained increased popularity at the expense of Indian soap operas in Hindi. This has led to protests from local producers that these are a threat to Pakistan's television industry, with local productions being moved out of peak viewing time or dropped altogether. Similarly, politicians leaders have expressed concerns over their content, given Turkey's less conservative culture.\n\nIn Vietnam, foreign-language films and programs are subtitled on television in Vietnamese. They were not dubbed until 1985, but are briefly translated with a speaker before commercial breaks. \"Rio\" was considered to be the very first American Hollywood film to be entirely dubbed in Vietnamese. Since then, children's films that came out afterwards have been released dubbed in theaters. HTV3 has dubbed television programs for children, including \"Ben 10\", and \"Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide\", by using various voice actors to dub over the character roles.\n\nSooner afterwards, more programs started to get dubbed. HTV3 also offers anime dubbed into Vietnamese. Pokémon got a Vietnamese dub in early 2014 on HTV3 starting with the Best Wishes series. But due to a controversy regarding Pokémon's cries being re-dubbed despite that all characters had their Japanese names, it was switched to VTV2 in September 2015 when the XY series debut. Sailor Moon also recently has been dubbed for HTV3 in Early 2015.\n\nIn multilingual Singapore, dubbing is rare for western programmes. English-language programmes on the free-to-air terrestrial channels are usually subtitled in Chinese or Malay. Chinese, Malay and Tamil programmes (except for news bulletins), are usually have subtitles in English and the original language during the prime time hours . Dual sound programs, such as Korean and Japanese dramas, offer sound in the original languages with subtitles, Mandarin-dubbed and subtitled, or English-dubbed. The deliberate policy to encourage Mandarin among citizens made it required by law for programs in other Chinese dialects (Hokkien, Cantonese and Teochew) to be dubbed into Mandarin, with the exception of traditional operas. Cantonese and Hokkien shows from Hong Kong and Taiwan, respectively, are available on VCD and DVD. In a recent development, news bulletins are subtitled.\n\nIn Iran, foreign films and television programs are dubbed in Persian. Dubbing began in 1946 with the advent of movies and cinemas in the country. Since then, foreign movies have always been dubbed for the cinema and TV. Using various voice actors and adding local hints and witticisms to the original contents, dubbing played a major role in attracting people to the cinemas and developing an interest in other cultures. The dubbing art in Iran reached its apex during the 1960s and 1970s with the inflow of American, European and Hindi movies.\n\nThe most famous musicals of the time, such as \"My Fair Lady\" and \"The Sound of Music\", were translated, adjusted and performed in Persian by the voice artists. Since the 1990s, for political reasons and under pressure from the state, the dubbing industry has declined, with movies dubbed only for the state TV channels. During recent years, DVDs with Persian subtitles have found a market among viewers for the same reason, but most people still prefer the Persian-speaking dubbed versions. Recently, privately operated companies started dubbing TV series by hiring famous dubbers.\n\nA List of Persian voice actors that associate with their actor counterparts are listed here.\n\nIn Georgia, original soundtracks are kept in TV series and films, and Georgian voice-over translation is voiced. But also here can be some exception, like some children cartoon.\n\nIn Azerbaijan, dubbing and voice-over translation is rare, as most Azerbaijani channels such as ARB Günəş air voice-overs or Azerbaijan originals.\n\nIn Algeria and Morocco, most foreign movies (especially Hollywood productions) are shown dubbed in French. These movies are usually imported directly from French film distributors. The choice of movies dubbed into French can be explained by the history of colonization of these countries by France and the widespread use of the French language (among the intellectual elite), in addition to the marginalization the two spoken languages, Berber and Darija. Another important factor is that local theaters and private media companies do not dub in local languages in order to avoid high costs, but also because of the lack of both expertise and demand.\n\nBeginning in the 1980s, dubbed series and movies for children in Modern Standard Arabic became a popular choice among most TV channels, cinemas and VHS/DVD stores. However, dubbed films are still imported, and dubbing is performed in Arab countries with a strong tradition of dubbing and subtitling (mainly Syria, Lebanon and Jordan). The evolution of movies targeting the adult audience was different. After the satellite boom in the Arab world and the emergence of Pan-Arab channels, the use of subtitles, which was already popular in the Middle East, was highly popular among local viewers in Algeria and Morocco.\n\nIn the Arab world (member states in North Africa, Western Asia and others), only children's films and TV series were dubbed in Arabic. Many different anime titles are dubbed in the Arabic language, as well. Everything else is usually shown in its original language with Arabic subtitles. Recently, The Arabic dubbing industry has boomed, and channels such as MBC Max, are now offering famous older action films aimed at an older audience dubbed in Arabic to be broadcast on television. Action movies such as \"Braveheart\", \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy and \"Troy\" have become some of the first foreign action titles to be dubbed in Arabic, rather than using subtitles, on the MBC Max channel. However, they can still be watched in their original language with subtitles.\n\nThere's even a list that showcases Arabic voice actors that dub for certain performers that associate with them.\nIn Tunisia, theaters usually show French-dubbed movies, but cinema attendance in the country for such movies is in continuous decline compared to Tunisian and Arab movies. This decline can be traced to the huge popularity of free-to-air Pan-Arab movie channels offering primarily subtitled content, and the government's reduced efforts to limit piracy. Tunisia National Television (TNT), the public broadcaster of Tunisia, is not allowed to show any content in any language other than Arabic, which forces it to broadcast only dubbed content (this restriction was recently removed for commercials). During the 1970s and 1980s, TNT (known as ERTT at the time) started dubbing famous cartoons in Tunisian and Standard Arabic. This move was highly successful locally, but was not able to compete with mainstream dubbing companies (especially in the Middle East). In the private sector, television channels are not subject to the language rule and sometimes broadcast foreign content dubbed into French (excluding children content), although some of them, such as Hannibal TV, started adopting subtitling in Arabic instead, which proved to be more popular than simply importing French-dubbed content.\n\nIn South Africa, many television programmes were dubbed in Afrikaans, with the original soundtrack (usually in English, but sometimes Dutch or German) \"simulcast\" in FM stereo on Radio 2000. These included US series such as \"The Six Million Dollar Man\", \"(Steve Austin: Die Man van Staal)\" \"Miami Vice\" \"(Misdaad in Miami)\", \"Beverly Hills 90210\", and the German detective series \"Derrick\".\n\nAs a result of the boycott by the British actors' union Equity, which banned the sale of most British television programmes, the puppet series \"The Adventures of Rupert Bear\" was dubbed into South African English, as the original voices had been recorded by Equity voice artists.\n\nThis practice has declined as a result of the reduction of airtime for the language on SABC TV, and the increase of locally produced material in Afrikaans on other channels like KykNet. Similarly, many programmes, such as \"The Jeffersons\", were dubbed into Zulu, but this has also declined as local drama production has increased. However, some animated films, such as \"Maya the Bee\", have been dubbed in both Afrikaans and Zulu by local artists.\n\nUganda's own film industry is fairly small, and foreign movies are commonly watched. The English sound track is often accompanied by the Luganda translation and comments, provided by an Ugandan \"video jockey\" (VJ). VJ's interpreting and narration may be available in a recorded form or live.\n\nIn common with other English-speaking countries, there has traditionally been little dubbing in Australia, with foreign-language television programmes and films being shown (usually on SBS) with subtitles or English dubs produced in other countries. This has also been the case in New Zealand, but the Maori Television Service, launched in 2004, has dubbed animated films into Maori. However, some TV commercials from foreign countries are dubbed, even if the original commercial came from another English-speaking country.\n\nSubtitles can be used instead of dubbing, as different countries have different traditions regarding the choice between dubbing and subtitling. On DVDs with higher translation budgets, the option for both types will often be provided to account for individual preferences; purists often demand subtitles. For small markets (small language area or films for a select audience), subtitling is more suitable, because it is cheaper. In the case of films for small children who cannot yet read, or do not read fast enough, dubbing is necessary.\n\nIn most English-speaking countries, dubbing is comparatively rare. In Israel, some programmes need to be comprehensible to speakers of both Hebrew and Russian. This cannot be accomplished with dubbing, so subtitling is much more commonplace—sometimes even with subtitles in multiple languages, with the soundtrack remaining in the original language, usually English. The same applies to certain television shows in Finland, where Finnish and Swedish are both official languages.\n\nIn the Netherlands, Flanders, Nordic countries, Estonia and Portugal, films and television programmes are shown in the original language (usually English) with subtitles, and only cartoons and children's movies and programs are dubbed, such as the \"Harry Potter\" series, \"Finding Nemo\", \"Shrek\", \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", and others. Cinemas usually show both a dubbed version and one with subtitles for this kind of movie, with the subtitled version shown later in the evening.\n\nIn Portugal, one terrestrial channel, TVI, dubbed U.S. series like \"Dawson's Creek\" into Portuguese. RTP also transmitted \"Friends\" in a dubbed version, but it was poorly received and later re-aired in a subtitled version. Cartoons, on the other hand, are usually dubbed, sometimes by well-known actors, even on TV. Animated movies are usually released to the cinemas in both subtitled and dubbed versions.\n\nIn Argentina and Venezuela, terrestrial channels air films and TV series in a dubbed version, as demanded by law. However, those same series can be seen on cable channels at more accessible time-slots in their subtitled version, and usually before they are shown on open TV. In contrast, the series \"The Simpsons\" is aired in its Mexican-dubbed version both on terrestrial television and on the cable station Fox, which broadcasts the series for the area. Although the first season of the series appeared with subtitles, this was not continued for the following seasons.\n\nIn Bulgaria, television series are dubbed, but most television channels use subtitles for action and drama movies. AXN uses subtitles for its series, but as of 2008 emphasizes dubbing. Only Diema channels dub all programs. Movies in theaters, with the exception of films for children, use dubbing and subtitles. Dubbing of television programs is usually done using voiceovers, but usually, voices professional actors, while trying to give each character a different voice by using appropriate intonations. Dubbing with synchronized voices is rarely used, mostly for animated films. \"Mrs. Doubtfire\" is a rare example of a feature film dubbed this way on BNT Channel 1, though a subtitled version is currently shown on other channels.\n\nWalt Disney Television's animated series (such as \"DuckTales\", \"Darkwing Duck\", and \"Timon & Pumbaa\") were only aired with synchronized Bulgarian voices on BNT Channel 1 until 2005, but then the Disney shows were canceled. When airing of Disney series resumed on Nova Television and Jetix in 2008, voiceovers were used, but Disney animated-movie translations still use synchronized voices. Voiceover dubbing is not used in theatrical releases. The Bulgarian film industry law requires all children's films to be dubbed, not subtitled. Nova Television dubbed and aired the \"Pokémon\" anime with synchronized voices. Now, the show is airing on Disney Channel, also in a synchronized form.\n\nDubbing is also used in applications and genres other than traditional film, including video games, television, and pornographic films.\n\nMany video games originally produced in North America, Japan, and PAL countries are dubbed into foreign languages for release in areas such as Europe and Australia, especially for video games that place a heavy emphasis on dialogue. Because characters' mouth movements can be part of the game's code, lip sync is sometimes achieved by re-coding the mouth movements to match the dialogue in the new language. The Source engine automatically generates lip-sync data, making it easier for games to be localized.\n\nTo achieve synchronization when animations are intended only for the source language, localized content is mostly recorded using techniques borrowed from movie dubbing (such as rythmo band) or, when images are not available, localized dubbing is done using source audios as a reference. Sound-synch is a method where localized audios are recorded matching the length and internal pauses of the source content.\n\nFor the European version of a video game, the on-screen text of the game is available in various languages and, in many cases, the dialogue is dubbed into each respective language, as well.\n\nThe North American version of any game is always available in English, with translated text and dubbed dialogue, if necessary, in other languages, especially if the North American version of the game contains the same data as the European version. Several Japanese games, such as those in the \"Sonic the Hedgehog\", \"Dynasty Warriors\", and \"Soul\" series, are released with both the original Japanese audio and the English dub included.\n\nDubbing is occasionally used on network television broadcasts of films that contain dialogue that the network executives or censors have decided to replace. This is usually done to remove profanity. In most cases, the original actor does not perform this duty, but an actor with a similar voice reads the changes. The results are sometimes seamless, but, in many cases, the voice of the replacement actor sounds nothing like the original performer, which becomes particularly noticeable when extensive dialogue must be replaced. Also, often easy to notice, is the sudden absence of background sounds in the movie during the dubbed dialogue. Among the films considered notorious for using substitute actors that sound very different from their theatrical counterparts are the \"Smokey and the Bandit\" and the \"Die Hard\" film series, as shown on broadcasters such as TBS. In the case of \"Smokey and the Bandit\", extensive dubbing was done for the first network airing on ABC Television in 1978, especially for Jackie Gleason's character, Buford T. Justice. The dubbing of his phrase \"sombitch\" (son of a bitch) became the more palatable (and memorable) \"scum bum,\" which became a catchphrase of the time.\n\nDubbing is commonly used in science fiction television, as well. Sound generated by effects equipment such as animatronic puppets or by actors' movements on elaborate multi-level plywood sets (for example, starship bridges or other command centers) will quite often make the original character dialogue unusable. \"Stargate\" and \"Farscape\" are two prime examples where ADR is used heavily to produce usable audio.\n\nSince some anime series contain profanity, the studios recording the English dubs often re-record certain lines if a series or movie is going to be broadcast on Cartoon Network, removing references to death and hell as well. Some companies will offer both an edited and an uncut version of the series on DVD, so that there is an edited script available in case the series is broadcast. Other companies also edit the full-length version of a series, meaning that even on the uncut DVD characters say things like \"Blast!\" and \"Darn!\" in place of the original dialogue's profanity. Bandai Entertainment's English dub of \"G Gundam\" is infamous for this, among many other things, with such lines as \"Bartender, more milk\".\n\nDubbing has also been used for comedic purposes, replacing lines of dialogue to create comedies from footage that was originally another genre. Examples include the Australian shows \"The Olden Days\" and \"Bargearse\", re-dubbed from 1970s Australian drama and action series, respectively, and the Irish show \"Soupy Norman\", re-dubbed from \"\", a Polish soap opera.\n\nDubbing into a foreign language does not always entail the deletion of the original language. In some countries, a performer may read the translated dialogue as a voice-over. This often occurs in Russia and Poland, where \"lektories\" or \"lektors\" read the translated dialogue into Russian and Polish. In Poland, one announcer read all text. However, this is done almost exclusively for the television and home video markets, while theatrical releases are usually subtitled. Recently, however, the number of high-quality, fully dubbed films has increased, especially for children's movies. If a quality dubbed version exists for a film, it is shown in theaters. However, some films, such as \"Harry Potter\" or \"Star Wars\", are shown in both dubbed and subtitled versions, varying with the time of the show. Such films are also shown on TV (although some channels drop them and do standard one-narrator translation) and VHS/DVD. In other countries, like Vietnam, the voice-over technique is also used for theatrical releases.\n\nIn Russia, the reading of all lines by a single person is referred to as a Gavrilov translation, and is generally found only in illegal copies of films and on cable television. Professional copies always include at least two actors of opposite gender translating the dialogue. Some titles in Poland have been dubbed this way, too, but this method lacks public appeal, so it is very rare now.\n\nOn special occasions, such as film festivals, live interpreting is often done by professionals.\n\nAs budgets for pornographic films are often small, compared to films made by major studios, and there is an inherent need to film without interrupting filming, it is common for sex scenes to be over-dubbed. The audio for such over-dubbing is generally referred to as \"the Ms and Gs\", or \"the moans and groans.\"\n\nIn the case of languages with large communities (such as English, Chinese, Portuguese, German, Spanish, or French), a single translation may sound foreign to native speakers in a given region. Therefore, a film may be translated into a dialect of a certain language. For example, the animated movie \"The Incredibles\" was translated to European Spanish, Mexican Spanish, Neutral Spanish (which used the Mexican voice cast), and Rioplatense Spanish (although people from Chile and Uruguay noticed a strong \"porteño\" accent from most of the characters of the Rioplatense Spanish translation). In Spanish-speaking regions, most media is dubbed only twice into Spanish (Spain) and Neutral Spanish (which is Mexican Spanish but avoids colloquialisms).\n\nAnother example is the French dialect dubbing of \"The Simpsons\", which is entirely different in Quebec and France, the humor being very different for each audience (see Non-English versions of \"The Simpsons\"). Audiences in Quebec are generally critical of France's dubbing of \"The Simpsons\", which they often do not find amusing. The French-language Télétoon network once aired the Quebec dub for \"The Simpsons\", as well as Parisian French dubs of \"Futurama\" and \"Family Guy\", which were both similar to the Parisian dub for \"The Simpsons\". The two latter shows have since been taken off the network, while \"The Simpsons\" continues its run on Télétoon.\n\nThe Quebec French dubbing of films, while generally made in accent-free Standard French, may sound peculiar to audiences in France because of the persistence of some regionally neutral expression and because Quebec French performers pronounce Anglo-Saxon names with an American accent, while French performers do not. Occasionally, for reasons of cost, American direct-to-video films, such as the 1995 film \"When the Bullet Hits the Bone\", are released in France with a Quebec French dubbing, sometimes resulting in what some members of French audiences perceive as unintentional humor.\n\nPortugal and Brazil also use different versions of dubbed films and series. Because dubbing has never been very popular in Portugal, for decades, children's films were distributed using the higher-quality Brazilian dub (unlike children's TV series - traditionally dubbed in European Portuguese). Only in the 1990s did dubbing begin to gain importance in Portugal. \"The Lion King\" became the first Disney feature film to be completely dubbed into European Portuguese and, subsequently, all major animation films gained European Portuguese versions. In recent DVD releases, most of these Brazilian-dubbed classics were released with new Portuguese dubs, eliminating the predominance of Brazilian Portuguese dubs in Portugal.\n\nSimilarly, in the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in Belgium, cartoons are often dubbed locally by Flemish artists, rather than using soundtracks produced in the Netherlands.\n\nThe German-speaking region, which includes Germany, Austria, the German-speaking part of Switzerland, and Liechtenstein share a common German-dubbed version. Although there are some differences in German dialects, all films, shows, and series are dubbed into a single standard German version that avoids regional variations in the German-speaking audience. Most voice actors are primarily Germans and Austrians, since there has been a long tradition of dubbing films. Switzerland, which has four official languages (German, French, Italian, Romansh), generally uses dubbed versions made in each respective country (except for Romansh). Liechtenstein uses German-dubbed versions only.\n\nSometimes, films are also dubbed into several German dialects (Berlinerisch, Kölsch, Saxonian, Austro-Bavarian or Swiss German), which especially concerns animated films and Disney films. These are made for amusement and as an additional \"special feature\" to entice the audience into buying it. Popular animated films dubbed into German dialects include \"Asterix\" films (in addition to its standard German version, every film has a particular dialect version), \"The Little Mermaid\", \"Shrek 2\", \"Cars\", (+ Austrian German) and \"Up\" (+ Austrian German).\n\nSome live-action films or TV-series have an additional German dialect dubbing: \"Babe\" and its sequel, \"\" (Germany German, Austrian German, Swiss German); and \"Rehearsal for Murder\", \"Framed\" (+ Austrian German); \"The Munsters\", \"Serpico\", \"Rumpole\" (+ Austrian German), and \"The Thorn Birds\"\n(only Austrian German dubbing).\n\nBefore German reunification, East Germany also made its own particular German version. For example, \"Olsen Gang\" and the Hungarian animated series \"The Mézga Family\" were dubbed in West Germany as well as East Germany.\n\nUsually, there are two dubbings produced in dialects of Serbo-Croatian: Serbian and Croatian. Serbian for Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia & Herzegovina; Croatian for Croatia and parts of Bosnia & Herzegovina.\n\nThe many martial arts movies from Hong Kong that were imported under the unofficial banner Kung Fu Theater were notorious for seemingly careless dubbing that included poor lip sync and awkward dialogue. Since the results were frequently unintentionally hilarious, this has become one of the hallmarks that endear these films to part of the 1980s culture.\n\nWhile the voice actors involved usually bear the brunt of criticisms towards poor dubbing, other factors may include inaccurate script translation and poor audio mixing. Dialogue typically contains speech patterns and sentence structure that are natural to the language but would appear awkward if translated literally. English dubs of Japanese animation, for example, must rewrite the dialogue so that it flows smoothly and follows the natural pattern of English speech. Voice actors in a dubbing capacity typically do not have the luxury of viewing the original film with the original voice actor and thus have little idea regarding how to perform the role. On some occasions, voice actors record their dialogue separately, which can lack the dynamics gained from performing as a group.\n\n"}
{"id": "8864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8864", "title": "Delaunay triangulation", "text": "Delaunay triangulation\n\nIn mathematics and computational geometry, a Delaunay triangulation for a given set P of discrete points in a plane is a triangulation DT(P) such that no point in P is inside the circumcircle of any triangle in DT(P). Delaunay triangulations maximize the minimum angle of all the angles of the triangles in the triangulation; they tend to avoid sliver triangles. The triangulation is named after Boris Delaunay for his work on this topic from 1934.\n\nFor a set of points on the same line there is no Delaunay triangulation (the notion of triangulation is degenerate for this case). For four or more points on the same circle (e.g., the vertices of a rectangle) the Delaunay triangulation is not unique: each of the two possible triangulations that split the quadrangle into two triangles satisfies the \"Delaunay condition\", i.e., the requirement that the circumcircles of all triangles have empty interiors.\n\nBy considering circumscribed spheres, the notion of Delaunay triangulation extends to three and higher dimensions. Generalizations are possible to metrics other than Euclidean distance. However, in these cases a Delaunay triangulation is not guaranteed to exist or be unique.\n\nThe Delaunay triangulation of a discrete point set P in general position corresponds to the dual graph of the Voronoi diagram for P. Special cases include the existence of three points on a line and four points on circle.\n\nFor a set P of points in the (\"d\"-dimensional) Euclidean space, a Delaunay triangulation is a triangulation DT(P) such that no point in P is inside the circum-hypersphere of any simplex in DT(P). It is known that there exists a unique Delaunay triangulation for P if P is a set of points in \"general position\"; that is, the affine hull of P is \"d\"-dimensional and no set of \"d\" + 2 points in P lie on the boundary of a ball whose interior does not intersect P.\n\nThe problem of finding the Delaunay triangulation of a set of points in \"d\"-dimensional Euclidean space can be converted to the problem of finding the convex hull of a set of points in (\"d\" + 1)-dimensional space, by giving each point \"p\" an extra coordinate equal to |\"p\"|, taking the bottom side of the convex hull, and mapping back to \"d\"-dimensional space by deleting the last coordinate. As the convex hull is unique, so is the triangulation, assuming all facets of the convex hull are simplices. Nonsimplicial facets only occur when \"d\" + 2 of the original points lie on the same \"d\"-hypersphere, i.e., the points are not in general position.\n\nLet \"n\" be the number of points and \"d\" the number of dimensions.\n\n\nFrom the above properties an important feature arises: Looking at two triangles ABD and BCD with the common edge BD (see figures), if the sum of the angles α and γ is less than or equal to 180°, the triangles meet the Delaunay condition.\n\nThis is an important property because it allows the use of a \"flipping\" technique. If two triangles do not meet the Delaunay condition, switching the common edge BD for the common edge AC produces two triangles that do meet the Delaunay condition:\n\nThis operation is called a \"flip\", and can be generalised to three and higher dimensions.\n\nMany algorithms for computing Delaunay triangulations rely on fast operations for detecting when a point is within a triangle's circumcircle and an efficient data structure for storing triangles and edges. In two dimensions, one way to detect if point \"D\" lies in the circumcircle of \"A\", \"B\", \"C\" is to evaluate the determinant:\n\nWhen \"A\", \"B\" and \"C\" are sorted in a counterclockwise order, this determinant is positive if and only if \"D\" lies inside the circumcircle.\n\nAs mentioned above, if a triangle is non-Delaunay, we can flip one of its edges. This leads to a straightforward algorithm: construct any triangulation of the points, and then flip edges until no triangle is non-Delaunay. Unfortunately, this can take Ω(\"n\") edge flips. While this algorithm can be generalised to three and higher dimensions, its convergence is not guaranteed in these cases, as it is conditioned to the connectedness of the underlying flip graph: this graph is connected for two dimensional sets of points, but may be disconnected in higher dimensions.\n\nThe most straightforward way of efficiently computing the Delaunay triangulation is to repeatedly add one vertex at a time, retriangulating the affected parts of the graph. When a vertex \"v\" is added, we split in three the triangle that contains \"v\", then we apply the flip algorithm. Done naïvely, this will take O(\"n\") time: we search through all the triangles to find the one that contains \"v\", then we potentially flip away every triangle. Then the overall runtime is O(\"n\").\n\nIf we insert vertices in random order, it turns out (by a somewhat intricate proof) that each insertion will flip, on average, only O(1) triangles – although sometimes it will flip many more.\nThis still leaves the point location time to improve. We can store the history of the splits and flips performed: each triangle stores a pointer to the two or three triangles that replaced it. To find the triangle that contains \"v\", we start at a root triangle, and follow the pointer that points to a triangle that contains \"v\", until we find a triangle that has not yet been replaced. On average, this will also take O(log \"n\") time. Over all vertices, then, this takes O(\"n\" log \"n\") time. While the technique extends to higher dimension (as proved by Edelsbrunner and Shah), the runtime can be exponential in the dimension even if the final Delaunay triangulation is small.\n\nThe Bowyer–Watson algorithm provides another approach for incremental construction. It gives an alternative to edge flipping for computing the Delaunay triangles containing a newly inserted vertex.\n\nA divide and conquer algorithm for triangulations in two dimensions is due to Lee and Schachter which was improved by Guibas and Stolfi and later by Dwyer. In this algorithm, one recursively draws a line to split the vertices into two sets. The Delaunay triangulation is computed for each set, and then the two sets are merged along the splitting line. Using some clever tricks, the merge operation can be done in time O(\"n\"), so the total running time is O(\"n\" log \"n\").\n\nFor certain types of point sets, such as a uniform random distribution, by intelligently picking the splitting lines the expected time can be reduced to O(\"n\" log log \"n\") while still maintaining worst-case performance.\n\nA divide and conquer paradigm to performing a triangulation in \"d\" dimensions is presented in \"DeWall: A fast divide and conquer Delaunay triangulation algorithm in E\" by P. Cignoni, C. Montani, R. Scopigno.\n\nDivide and conquer has been shown to be the fastest DT generation technique.\n\nSweephull is a hybrid technique for 2D Delaunay triangulation that uses a radially propagating sweep-hull, and a flipping algorithm. The sweep-hull is created sequentially by iterating a radially-sorted set of 2D points, and connecting triangles to the visible part of the convex hull, which gives a non-overlapping triangulation. One can build a convex hull in this manner so long as the order of points guarantees no point would fall within the triangle. But, radially sorting should minimize flipping by being highly Delaunay to start. This is then paired with a ﬁnal iterative triangle ﬂipping step.\n\nThe Euclidean minimum spanning tree of a set of points is a subset of the Delaunay triangulation of the same points, and this can be exploited to compute it efficiently.\n\nFor modelling terrain or other objects given a set of sample points, the Delaunay triangulation gives a nice set of triangles to use as polygons in the model. In particular, the Delaunay triangulation avoids narrow triangles (as they have large circumcircles compared to their area). See triangulated irregular network.\n\nDelaunay triangulations can be used to determine the density or intensity of points samplings by means of the DTFE.\nDelaunay triangulations are often used to build meshes for space-discretised solvers such as the finite element method and the finite volume method of physics simulation, because of the angle guarantee and because fast triangulation algorithms have been developed. Typically, the domain to be meshed is specified as a coarse simplicial complex; for the mesh to be numerically stable, it must be refined, for instance by using Ruppert's algorithm.\n\nThe increasing popularity of finite element method and boundary element method techniques increases the incentive to improve automatic meshing algorithms. However, all of these algorithms can create distorted and even unusable grid elements. Fortunately, several techniques exist which can take an existing mesh and improve its quality. For example, smoothing (also referred to as mesh refinement) is one such method, which repositions nodal locations so as to minimize element distortion. The stretched grid method allows the generation of pseudo-regular meshes that meet the Delaunay criteria easily and quickly in a one-step solution.\n\nConstrained Delaunay triangulation has found applications in path planning in automated driving \n\n\n"}
{"id": "8865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8865", "title": "Defendant", "text": "Defendant\n\nA defendant is a person accused of a crime in criminal prosecution or a person against whom some type of civil relief is being sought in a civil case.\n\nTerminology varies from one jurisdiction to another. For example, Scots law does not use the term \"defendant\"; the terms \"accused\" or \"panel\" are used instead in criminal proceedings, and \"defender\" in civil proceedings.\n\nIn a criminal trial, a defendant is a person accused (charged) of committing an offense (a crime; an act defined as punishable under criminal law). The other party to a criminal trial is usually a public prosecutor, but in some jurisdictions, private prosecutions are allowed.\n\nCriminal defendants are often taken into custody by police and brought before a court under an arrest warrant. Criminal defendants are usually obliged to post bail before being released from custody. For serious cases, such as murder, bail is often refused. Defendants must be present at every stage of the proceedings against them. (There is an exception for very minor cases such as traffic offenses in jurisdictions which treat them as crimes.)\n\nIn some jurisdictions, vulnerable defendants may be able to access the services of a Non-Registered Intermediary to assist with communication at court.\n\nIn a civil lawsuit, a defendant (or a respondent) is also the accused party, although not of an offense, but of a civil wrong (a tort or a breach of contract, for instance). The person who starts the civil action through filing a complaint is referred to as the plaintiff. \n\nDefendants in civil actions usually make their first court appearance voluntarily in response to a summons. Historically, civil defendants could be taken into custody under a writ of \"Caspian ad respondent\". Modern-day civil defendants are usually able to avoid most (if not all) court appearances if represented by a lawyer. \n\nMost often and familiarly, defendants are persons: either natural persons (actual human beings) or juridical persons (\"persona fiction\") under the legal fiction of treating organizations as persons. But a defendant may be an object, in which case the object itself is the direct subject of the action. When a court has jurisdiction over an object, it is said to have jurisdiction \"in rem\". An example of an \"in rem\" case is \"United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola\" (1916), where the defendant was not The Coca-Cola Company itself, but rather \"Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola\". In current US legal practice, \"in rem\" suits are primarily asset forfeiture cases, based on drug laws, as in \"USA v. $124,700\" (2006).\n\nDefendants can set up an account to pay for litigation costs and legal expenses. These legal defense funds can have large membership counts where members contribute to the fund. The fund can be public or private and is set up for individuals, organizations, or a particular purpose. These funds are often used by public officials, civil-rights organizations, and public-interest organizations.\n\nHistorically, \"defendant\" was a legal term for a person prosecuted for misdemeanour. It was not applicable to a person prosecuted for felony.\n\n"}
{"id": "8873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8873", "title": "Domitius Afer", "text": "Domitius Afer\n\nGnaeus Domitius Afer (died 59) was a Roman orator and advocate, born at Nemausus (Nîmes) in Gallia Narbonensis. He flourished in the reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero.\n\nHe became praetor in 25 AD, and gained the favor of Tiberius by accusing Claudia Pulchra, the second cousin of Agrippina, of adultery and the use of magic arts against the emperor, in 26 AD. From this time he became one of the most celebrated orators in Rome, but sacrificed his character by conducting accusations for the government. In the following year, 27 AD, he is again mentioned by Tacitus as the accuser of Quinctilius Varus, the son of Claudia Pulchra. In consequence of the accusation of Claudia Pulchra, and of some offense which he had given to Caligula, he was accused by the emperor in the senate, but by concealing his own skill in speaking, and pretending to be overpowered by the eloquence of Caligula, he not only escaped the danger, but was made consul suffectus in 39 AD.\n\nIn his old age Afer lost much of his reputation by continuing to speak in public, when his powers were exhausted. During the reign of Nero he became \"curator aquarum\", or superintendent of the city's water supply, but died not long afterwards, in 59 AD, having eaten himself to death, according to Jerome in the Chronicon of Eusebius.\n\nQuintilian, when a young man, heard Afer, and frequently speaks of him as the most distinguished orator of his age. He says that Afer and Julius Africanus were the best orators he had heard, and that he prefers the former to the latter, Quintilian refers to a work of his \"On Testimony\", to one entitled \"Dicta\", and to some of his orations, of which those on behalf of Domitilla, or Cloantilla, and Volusenus Catulus seem to have been the most celebrated.\n\nAccording to Pliny the Younger, in his will Afer had made Titius Marcellus Curvius Lucanus and Titius Marcellus Curvius Tullus his heirs on the condition that they take on his name. He had prosecuted their father, Sextus Curvius Tullus, stripping him of his wealth and citizenship. Pliny comments that Afer's will had been drawn up 18 years previously, suggesting that Afer and Tullus the elder had once been friends.\n\n \n"}
{"id": "8875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8875", "title": "Dan Simmons", "text": "Dan Simmons\n\nDan Simmons (born April 4, 1948) is an American science fiction and horror writer. He is the author of the Hyperion Cantos and the Ilium/Olympos cycles, among other works which span the science fiction, horror, and fantasy genres, sometimes within a single novel. A typical example of Simmons' intermingling of genres is \"Song of Kali\" (1985), winner of World Fantasy Award. He also writes mysteries and thrillers, some of which feature the continuing character Joe Kurtz.\n\nBorn in Peoria, Illinois, Simmons received a B.A. in English from Wabash College in 1970, and, in 1971, a Masters in Education from Washington University in St. Louis.\n\nHe soon started to write short stories, although his career did not take off until 1982, when, through Harlan Ellison's help, his short story \"The River Styx Runs Upstream\" was published and awarded first prize in a \"Twilight Zone Magazine\" story competition. His first novel, \"Song of Kali\", was released in 1985.\n\nHe worked in elementary education until 1989.\n\n\"Summer of Night\" (1991) recounts the childhood of a group of pre-teens who band together in the 1960s, to defeat a centuries-old evil that terrorizes their hometown of Elm Haven, Illinois. The novel, which was praised by Stephen King in a cover blurb, is similar to King's \"It\" (1986) in its focus on small town life, the corruption of innocence, the return of an ancient evil, and the responsibility for others that emerges with the transition from youth to adulthood.\n\nIn the sequel to \"Summer of Night\", \"A Winter Haunting\" (2002), Dale Stewart (one of the first book's protagonists, and now an adult), revisits his boyhood home to come to grips with mysteries that have disrupted his adult life. \"Children of the Night\" (1992), another loose sequel, features Mike O'Rourke, now much older and a Roman Catholic priest, who is sent on a mission to investigate bizarre events in a European city. Another \"Summer of Night\" character, Dale's younger brother, Lawrence Stewart, appears as a minor character in Simmons' thriller \"Darwin's Blade\" (2000), while the adult Cordie Cooke appears in \"Fires of Eden\" (1994).\n\nSoon after \"Summer of Night\" (1991), Simmons, who had written mostly horror fiction, began to focus on writing science fiction, although in 2007 he returned with a work of historical fiction and horror, \"The Terror\". In 2009, he also wrote a book, \"Drood\", based on the last years of Charles Dickens' life, leading up to the writing of \"The Mystery of Edwin Drood\", which Dickens had partially completed at the time of his death.\n\n\"The Terror\" (2007) crosses the bridge between horror and historical fiction. It is a fictionalized account of Captain John Franklin's expedition to find the Northwest Passage. The two ships, HMS \"Erebus\" and HMS \"Terror\", become icebound the first winter, and the captains and crew struggle to survive while being stalked across an Arctic landscape by a monster.\n\n\"The Abominable\" (2013) recounts a mid-1920s attempt on Mount Everest by five climbers—two English, one French, one Sherpa, and one American (the narrator)—to recover the body of the cousin of one of the English characters.\n\nMany of Simmons' works have strong ties with classic literature. His 1989 for \"Hyperion\", winner of Hugo and Locus Awards for the best science fiction novel, deals with a space war, and is inspired in its structure by Boccaccio's \"Decameron\" and Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". The \"Hyperion Cantos\" take their titles from poems by the English Romantic John Keats, while that of \"Carrion Comfort\", as well as many of its themes, derives from a poem by Gerard Manley Hopkins. In \"The Fall of Hyperion\", John Keats himself appears as one of the main characters, with references to characters in \"Forbidden Planet\" and \"The Time Machine\".\n\nOther influences in his work include:\n\nIn 2009, Scott Derrickson was set to direct \"\"Hyperion Cantos\"\" for Warner Bros. and Graham King, with Trevor Sands penning the script to blend the first two cantos \"Hyperion\" and \"The Fall of Hyperion\" into one film. In 2011, actor Bradley Cooper expressed interest in taking over the adaptation. In 2015, it was announced that TV channel Syfy will produce a mini-series based on the Hyperion Cantos with the involvement of Cooper and King.\n\n\"The Terror\" (2007) is being adapted as an AMC TV series.\n\n\n\n\n\n\nBram Stoker Award\n\nBritish Fantasy Society Award\n\nBritish Science Fiction Award\n\nHugo Award\n\nInternational Horror Guild Award\n\nLocus Award\nNocte Award\nSeiun Award\nWorld Fantasy Award\n\nDan Simmons has been nominated on numerous occasions in a range of categories for his fiction, including the Arthur C. Clarke Award, Bram Stoker Award, British Fantasy Society Award, Hugo Award, Nebula Award, and World Fantasy Award.\n\n"}
{"id": "8876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8876", "title": "Denis Auguste Affre", "text": "Denis Auguste Affre\n\nDenis-Auguste Affre (27 September 179327 June 1848) was Archbishop of Paris from 1840 to 1848. He was killed while trying to negotiate peace during the June Days uprising of 1848.\n\nHis cause of canonization has commenced and he is titled as a Servant of God.\n\nAffre was born at Saint-Rome-de-Tarn, in the department of Aveyron. At the age of 14, he began to study for the priesthood at the Seminary of Saint-Sulpice, Paris, which was under the direction of his uncle, the Abbé Denis Boyer, S.S. He was an excellent student, and, while still a seminarian, soon became an instructor of dogmatic theology at the seminary in Nantes. \n\nIn 1818, he was ordained as a Catholic priest. From 1823 to 1833 he served as the Vicar General, first of the Diocese of Luçon and then of Amiens. In 1839, he was appointed as coadjutor bishop of the Diocese of Strasbourg.\n\nAffre was elevated to the post of Archbishop of Paris in 1840. Though opposed to the government of King Louis-Philippe I, he fully accepted the establishment of the French Second Republic in 1848; nevertheless he took no part in politics, but devoted himself to pastoral care. He opened new parishes in the working-class neighborhoods of the city. Among them were Ménilmontant, Plaisance, Petit-Montrouge, Maison-Blanche, Petit-Gentilly, Notre-Dame de la Gare, Billancourt, Gros-Caillou.\n\nAffre was passionate in his determination to improve the study of theology in order to form clergy needed in the challenges which the Catholic Church faced at the time. He also was insistent on education as a human right. He opened a new seminary in Paris, called the , on the site of a former Carmelite priory, and a school of theology at the Sorbonne.\n\nAffre's episcopate, however, is chiefly remembered owing to its tragic close during the insurrection of June 1848.\n\nOn 23 June 1848, faced with starvation due to plans by the French government to close the National Workshops it had recently created in order to provide work to the poor, a large segment of the citizenry began rioting, setting up barricades in the streets of Paris. The crisis led to the government's handing dictatorial powers over the nation to General Louis Eugène Cavaignac, who was determined to use all force necessary to crush the rebellion and ordered the French National Guard into Paris. Seeing the carnage caused among the civilian population caused by this campaign, Frederic Ozanam, the founder of the Society of St. Vincent de Paul, begged Affre to intervene to stop the bloodshed. The archbishop was led to believe that by his personal involvement peace might be restored between the military and the insurgents.\n\nAccordingly, on 25 June, in spite of the warning of Cavaignac, Affre mounted the barricade at the entrance to the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, bearing a green branch as sign of peace to address both sides. He had spoken only a few words, however, when the insurgents, hearing some shots and feeling that they had been betrayed, opened fire upon the National Guard. Affre fell, struck by a stray bullet. He was taken to his palace, where he died on 27 June.\n\nOn the next day, the National Assembly of France issued a decree expressing its great sorrow over Affre's death, and the public funeral held on 7 July was one of the most striking public spectacles of the period. The crowd following his cortege was estimated to have numbered about 200,000 people.\n\nAffre was buried in the Chapel of Saint-Denis in the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris. His heart was removed and preserved in the chapel of the Carmelite Seminary, which he had founded. The pectoral cross which he was wearing when he was shot—seen in his portrait—is preserved by the Archdiocese of Paris as a relic.\n\nA street in the 18th arrondissement of Paris is named in his honor.\n\nAffre wrote several articles for a newspaper called \"La France chrétienne\". Additionally he published two books to guide in the practical matters of handling Church property: \" Un Traité de l'administration temporelle des paroisses\" (Paris, 1827) and \"Un Traité de la propriété des biens ecclésiastiques\" (Paris, 1837). He also wrote a guide to studying the Christian faith, \"Une Introduction philosophique à l'étude du christianisme\" (Paris, 5th edition, 1846).\n\n \n"}
{"id": "8877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8877", "title": "Dione", "text": "Dione\n\nDione may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8878", "title": "Denis Leary", "text": "Denis Leary\n\nDenis Colin Leary (born August 18, 1957) is an American actor, writer, producer, singer and comedian.\n\nLeary was the star and co-creator of \"Rescue Me\", which ended its seventh and final season on September 7, 2011. He has starred in many films including playing Captain George Stacy in Marc Webb's film, \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", Cleveland Browns Head Coach Vince Penn in Ivan Reitman's film, \"Draft Day\", and as the voice of Francis in \"A Bug's Life\" and Diego in the \"Ice Age\" franchise.\n\nFrom 2015 to 2016, Leary wrote and starred in the comedy series, \"Sex&Drugs&Rock&Roll\" on FX.\n\nDenis Colin Leary was born on August 18, 1957, in Worcester, Massachusetts, the son of Roman Catholic immigrant parents from County Kerry, Ireland. His mother, Nora (née Sullivan) (b. 1929), was a maid, and his father, John Leary (1924-1985), was an auto mechanic. Being the son of Irish parents, Leary is a citizen of both the United States and Ireland. Through marriage, Leary is a third cousin of talk show host, Conan O'Brien.\n\nHe attended Saint Peter's High School (now Saint Peter-Marian High School), in Worcester and graduated from Emerson College, in Boston. At Emerson, he met fellow comic Mario Cantone, whom to this day Leary considers his closest friend. At the school, he founded the Emerson Comedy Workshop, a troupe that continues on-campus today.\n\nAfter graduating with the Emerson Class of 1981, he took a job at the school teaching comedy writing classes and maintained the job for five years. He received an honorary doctorate and spoke briefly at his alma mater's undergraduate commencement ceremony on May 16, 2005; he is thus credited as \"Dr. Denis Leary\" on the cover of his 2009 book, \"Why We Suck\".\n\nLeary began working as a comedian in the Boston comedy scene of the 1980s at the underground club, Play It Again Sam's; however, his first real gig was at the Rascals Comedy Club as part of the TV show, \"The Rascals Comedy Hour\", on October 18, 1990. He wrote and appeared on a local comedy series, \"The Late, Late Show\", hosted by his friend, Lenny Clarke, and written by writer, Martin Olson. Leary and Clarke both spoke about their early affiliations and influences in the Boston comedy scene in the documentary film, \"When Standup Stood Out\" (2006), and during this time, he developed his stage persona. He appeared in skits on the MTV game show \"Remote Control\", playing such characters as Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones, the brother of co-host Colin Quinn, and artist Andy Warhol. \n\nLeary earned fame when he ranted about R.E.M. in an early 1990s MTV sketch. Several other commercials for MTV quickly followed, in which Leary would rant at high speeds about a variety of topics, playing off the then-popular and growing alternative scene. One of these rants serves as an introduction to the video of \"Shamrocks and Shenanigans (Boom Shalock Lock Boom)\" by House of Pain. He released two records of his stand-up comedy: \"No Cure for Cancer\" (1993) and \"Lock 'n Load\" (1997). In late 2004, he released the EP \"Merry F#%$in' Christmas\", which included a mix of new music, previously unreleased recordings, and some tracks from \"Lock 'n Load\". \n\nIn 1993, his sardonic song about the stereotypical American male, \"Asshole\", achieved much notoriety; however, this bit was allegedly stolen from Louis C.K., discussed by Louis on an interview on the Opie and Anthony Show. It was voted #1 in an Australian youth radio poll (the Triple J Hottest 100). The song was used as part of the Holsten Pils series of ads in the UK, in which Leary was participating, with adapted lyrics criticizing a drunk driver. The single was a minor hit there, peaking at No. 58 in the UK Singles Chart in January 1996.\n\nLeary has appeared in more than 40 films, including: \"The Sandlot\" as Scott's stepfather Bill, \"Monument Ave.\", \"The Matchmaker\", \"The Ref\", \"Draft Day\", \"Suicide Kings\", \"Dawg\", \"Wag the Dog\", \"Demolition Man\", \"Judgment Night\", \"The Thomas Crown Affair\", and \"Operation Dumbo Drop\". He had a tiny part in Oliver Stone's \"Natural Born Killers\" that was eventually cut. He held the lead role in two television series, \"The Job\" and \"Rescue Me\", and he co-created the latter, in which he played Tommy Gavin, a New York City firefighter dealing with alcoholism, family dysfunction and other issues in post-9/11 New York City.\n\nHe received Emmy Award nominations in 2006 and 2007 for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for \"Rescue Me\", and in 2008 for Outstanding Supporting Actor In A Miniseries Or A Movie for the HBO movie \"Recount\". Leary was offered the role of Dignam in \"The Departed\" (2006) but turned it down due to scheduling conflicts with \"Rescue Me\". He provided voices for characters in animated films, such as a fire-breathing dragon named Flame in the series \"The Agents\", a pugnacious ladybug named Francis in \"A Bug's Life\" and a prehistoric saber-toothed tiger named Diego in the \"Ice Age\" film series. He has produced numerous movies, television shows, and specials through his production company, Apostle; these include Comedy Central's \"Shorties Watchin' Shorties\", the stand-up special \"Denis Leary's Merry F#$%in' Christmas\", and the movie \"Blow\". \n\nAs a Boston Red Sox fan, he narrated the official 2004 World Series film (Q Video/MLB Productions, 2004). In 2006, Leary and Lenny Clarke appeared on television during a Red Sox telecast and, upon realizing that Red Sox first baseman Kevin Youkilis is Jewish, delivered a criticism of Mel Gibson's antisemitic comments. As an ice hockey fan, Leary hosted the National Hockey League video \"NHL's Greatest Goals\". In 2003, he was the subject of the \"Comedy Central Roast of Denis Leary\".\n\nLeary did the TV voiceover for MLB 2K8 advertisements, where he used his trademark rant style in baseball terms, and ads for the 2009 Ford F-150 pickup truck. He has also appeared in commercials for Hulu and DirecTV's NFL Sunday Ticket package. Leary was a producer of the Fox Broadcasting series \"Canterbury's Law\", and wrote and directed its pilot episode. \"Canterbury's Law\" aired in the spring of 2008 and was canceled after eight episodes. On September 9, 2008, Leary hosted the sixth annual \"Fashion Rocks\" event, which aired on CBS. In December of the year, he appeared in a video on funnyordie.com critiquing a list of some of his \"best\" films, titled \"Denis Leary Remembers Denis Leary Movies\". Also in 2008, Leary voiced a guest role as himself on the \"Lost Verizon\" episode of \"The Simpsons\".\n\nOn March 21, 2009, he began the \"Rescue Me Comedy Tour\" in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The 11-date tour, featuring \"Rescue Me\" co-stars Lenny Clarke and Adam Ferrara, was Leary's first stand-up comedy tour in 12 years. The Comedy Central special \"Douchebags and Donuts\", filmed during the tour, debuted on American television on January 16, 2011, with a DVD release on January 18, 2011.\n\nHe played Captain George Stacy in the movie \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", released in July 2012. He wrote the American adaptation of \"Sirens\".\n\nHe is an Executive Producer of the documentary, \"Burn\", that chronicles the struggles of the Detroit Fire Department. \"Burn\" was the winner of the 2012 Tribeca Film Festival Audience Award.\n\nHe created a television series for FX, in which he also stars in the lead role, called \"Sex&Drugs&Rock&Roll\". A 10-episode first season was ordered by FX, which premiered on July 16, 2015. The show was renewed for a second season, which was broadcast in the summer of 2016, and was canceled after the broadcast of the second season.\nLeary has been the narrator for NESN's documentary show about the Boston Bruins Behind The B since the show began in 2013.\n\nLeary has been married to author Ann Lembeck Leary since 1989. They met when he was her instructor in an English class at Emerson College. They have two children, son John Joseph \"Jack\" (born 1990) and daughter Devin (born 1992). Ann Leary published a memoir, \"An Innocent, a Broad\", about the premature birth of their son on an overseas visit to London. She has also written a novel, \"Outtakes From a Marriage\", which was published in 2008. Her second novel, \"The Good House\", was published in 2013.\n\nLeary is an ice hockey fan, and has his own backyard hockey rink at his home in Roxbury, Connecticut, with piping installed under the ice surface to help the ice stay frozen. He is a fan of the Boston Bruins and the Boston Red Sox, as well as the Green Bay Packers.\n\nLeary describes himself as a Jack Kennedy Democrat with some conservative ideologies, including support for the military. Leary told Glenn Beck, \"I was a life-long Democrat, but now at my age, I've come to realize that the Democrats suck, and the Republicans suck, and basically the entire system sucks. But you have to go within the system to find what you want.\"\n\nLeary has said of his religious beliefs, \"I'm a lapsed Catholic in the best sense of the word. You know, I was raised with Irish parents, Irish immigrant parents. My parents, you know, prayed all the time, took us to Mass. And my father would sometimes swear in Gaelic. It doesn't get more religious than that. But, no, after a while, they taught us wrong. I didn't raise my kids with the fear of God. I raised my kids with the sense of, you know, to me, Jesus was this great guy...\"\n\nOn December 3, 1999, six firefighters from Leary's hometown of Worcester were killed in the Worcester Cold Storage Warehouse fire. Among the dead were Leary's cousin Jerry Lucey and his close childhood friend Lt. Tommy Spencer. In response, the comedian founded the Leary Firefighters Foundation. Since its creation in the year 2000, the foundation has distributed over $2.5 million (USD) to fire departments in the Worcester, Boston, and New York City areas for equipment, training materials, new vehicles, and new facilities. Leary won $125,000 for the foundation on the game show \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire\". Leary has close ties with 107.3/WAAF, which in 2000 released the station album \"Survive This!\" Part of the proceeds from this album were donated to the Leary Firefighters Foundation. \n\nA separate fund run by Leary's foundation, the Fund for New York's Bravest, has distributed over $2 million to the families of the 343 firemen killed in the September 11 attacks in 2001 in addition to providing funding for necessities such as a new mobile command center, first responder training, and a high-rise simulator for the New York City Fire Department's training campus. As the foundation's president, Leary has been active in all of the fundraising. In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, Leary donated over a dozen boats to the New Orleans Fire Department to aid in rescue efforts in future disasters. The foundation also rebuilt entire NOLA firehouses. \n\nFor many years, Leary had been friends with fellow comedian Bill Hicks. When Leary's comedy album \"No Cure for Cancer\" was released, many people believed Leary had stolen Hicks's act and material. The friendship ended abruptly as a result. In April 1993, the \"Austin Comedy News\" remarked on the similarities of Leary's performance, \"Watching Leary is like seeing Hicks from two years ago. He smokes with the same mannerisms. (Hicks recently quit) He sports the same attitude, the same clothes. He touches on almost all of the same themes. Leary even invokes Jim Fixx.\" When asked about this, Hicks told the magazine, \"I have a scoop for you. I stole his [Leary's] act. I camouflaged it with punchlines, and to really throw people off, I did it before he did\".\n\nAt least three stand-up comedians have gone on the record stating they believe Leary stole Hicks' material, comedic persona and attitude. One similar routine was about the band Judas Priest, during which Hicks says, \"I don't think we lost a cancer cure.\"\n\nDuring Leary's 2003 Comedy Central Roast, comedian Lenny Clarke, a friend of Leary's, said there was a carton of cigarettes backstage from Bill Hicks with the message, \"Wish I had gotten these to you sooner.\" This joke was cut from the final broadcast.\n\nThe feud is also mentioned in Cynthia True's biography \"American Scream: The Bill Hicks Story\":\nAccording to the book, True said upon hearing a tape of Leary's album \"No Cure for Cancer\", \"Bill was furious. All these years, aside from the occasional jibe, he had pretty much shrugged off Leary's lifting. Comedians borrowed, stole stuff and even bought bits from one another. Milton Berle and Robin Williams were famous for it. This was different. Leary had, practically line for line, taken huge chunks of Bill's act and \"recorded\" it.\"\n\nIn a 2008 appearance on \"The Opie and Anthony Show\", comedian Louis CK claimed that Leary stole his \"I'm an asshole\" routine, which was then expanded upon and turned into a hit song by Leary. On a later episode of the same show, Leary challenged this assertion by claiming that he (Leary) co-wrote the song with Chris Phillips.\n\nIn his 2008 book \"Why We Suck: A Feel Good Guide to Staying Fat, Loud, Lazy and Stupid\", Leary wrote:\n\nIn response to the controversy, Leary stated that the quote was taken out of context and that in that paragraph he had been talking about the trend of unwarranted over-diagnosis of autism, which he attributed to American parents seeking an excuse for behavioral problems and under-performance. Later, he apologized to parents with autistic children whom he had offended.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8879", "title": "Recreational use of dextromethorphan", "text": "Recreational use of dextromethorphan\n\nDextromethorphan, or DXM, a common active ingredient found in many over-the-counter cough suppressant cold medicines, is used as a recreational drug and entheogen for its dissociative effects. It has almost no psychoactive effects at medically recommended doses. Dextromethorphan has powerful dissociative properties when administered in doses well above those considered therapeutic for cough suppression. Recreational use of DXM is sometimes referred to in slang form as \"robo-tripping,\" whose prefix derives from the Robitussin brand name, or \"Triple Cs,\" which derives from the Coricidin brand. (The pills were printed with \"CCC\" for \"Coricidin Cough and Cold.\") However, this brand presents a danger when used at recreational doses due to the presence of chlorpheniramine.\n\nIn over-the-counter formulations, DXM is often combined with acetaminophen (paracetamol, APAP) to relieve pain and to prevent recreational use; however, to achieve DXM's dissociative effects, the maximum daily therapeutic dose of 4000 mg of APAP is often exceeded, potentially causing acute or chronic liver failure, making abuse and subsequent tolerance of products which contain both DXM and APAP potentially fatal.\n\nAn online essay first published in 1995 entitled \"The DXM FAQ\" described dextromethorphan's potential for recreational use, and classified its effects into plateaus.\n\nOwing to its recreational use and theft concerns, many retailers in the US have moved dextromethorphan-containing products behind the counter so that one must ask a pharmacist to receive them or be 18 years (19 in New York, Virginia, California, and Alabama, 21 in Mississippi) or older to purchase them. Some retailers also give out printed recommendations about the potential for abuse with the purchase of products containing dextromethorphan.\n\nAt high doses, dextromethorphan is classified as a dissociative general anesthetic and hallucinogen, similar to the controlled substances ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP). Also like those drugs, dextromethorphan is an NMDA receptor antagonist. Dextromethorphan generally does not produce withdrawal symptoms characteristic of physical dependence-inducing substances, but there have been cases of psychological dependence. Due to dextromethorphan's SSRI (selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor)-like action, the sudden cessation of recreational dosing in tolerant individuals can result in mental and physical withdrawal symptoms similar to the withdrawal from SSRIs. These withdrawal effects can manifest as psychological effects, including depression, irritability, cravings, and as physical effects, including lethargy, body aches, and a sensation of unpleasant tingling, not unlike a mild \"electric shock.\"\n\nDextromethorphan's effects have been divided into four plateaus. The first plateau (1.5 to 2.5 mg per kg body weight) is described as having euphoria, auditory changes, and change in perception of gravity. The second plateau (2.5 to 7.5 mg/kg) causes intense euphoria, vivid imagination, and closed-eye hallucinations may occur. The third and fourth plateaus (7.5 mg/kg and over) cause profound alterations in consciousness, and users often report out-of-body experiences or temporary psychosis. Flanging (speeding up or slowing down) of sensory input is also a characteristic effect of recreational use.\n\nThere is also a marked difference between dextromethorphan hydrobromide, contained in most cough suppressant preparations, and dextromethorphan polistirex, contained in the brand name preparation Delsym. Polistirex is a polymer that is bonded to the dextromethorphan that requires more time for the stomach to digest it as it requires that an ion exchange reaction take place prior to its dissolution into the blood. Because of this, dextromethorphan polistirex takes considerably longer to absorb, resulting in more gradual and longer lasting effects reminiscent of time release pills. As a cough suppressant, the polistirex version lasts up to 12 hours. This duration also holds true when used recreationally.\n\nIn 1981, a paper by Gosselin estimated that the lethal dose is between 50 and 500 mg/kg. Doses as high as 15–20 mg/kg are taken by some recreational users. It is suggested by a single case study that the antidote to dextromethorphan overdose is naloxone, administered intravenously.\n\nIn addition to producing PCP-like mental effects, high doses may cause a false-positive result for PCP and opiates in some drug tests.\n\nDextromethorphan has not been shown to cause vacuolization in animals, also known as Olney's lesions, despite early speculation that it might, due to similarities with phencyclidine (PCP). In rats, oral administration of dextromethorphan did not cause vacuolization in laboratory tests. Oral administration of dextromethorphan repeatedly during adolescence, however, has been shown to impair learning in those rats during adulthood. The occurrence of Olney's lesions in humans, however, has not been proven or disproven. William E. White, author of the \"DXM FAQ,\" has compiled informal research from correspondence with dextromethorphan users suggesting that heavy abuse may result in various deficits corresponding to the brain areas affected by Olney's lesions; these include loss of episodic memory, decline in ability to learn, abnormalities in some aspects of visual processing, and deficits of abstract language comprehension. In 2004, however, White retracted the article in which he made these claims.\n\nA formal survey of dextromethorphan users showed that more than half of users reported experience of the following withdrawal-symptoms individually for the first week after long-term/addictive dextromethorphan use: fatigue, apathy, flashbacks, and constipation. Over a quarter reported insomnia, nightmares, anhedonia, impaired memory, attention deficit and decreased libido. Rarer side effects included panic attacks, impaired learning, tremor, jaundice, urticaria (hives) and myalgia. DXM has also been \"known to increase the frequency of complex partial seizures in epileptics by 25% compared to placebo.\" Frequent and long-term usage at high doses could possibly lead to toxic psychosis and other permanent psychological problems. It is important to note that responsible DXM use has not been shown to cause the above issues.\n\nErectile dysfunction and diminished libido can be a longer-term effect (years to decades) of many narcotic analgesics due to development of central hypogonadism; this appears especially common in individuals with significant melanin deficiencies, as the hormones tied to melanin production affect the absorption and conversion of these analgesics into progesterone. Additionally, the haplotypes of about 48% of the indigenous population of Britain aggravate the condition, as the E647 sequence underwent epigenetic degradation and became a pseudogene. The chance of vulnerability is doubled for males, as the critical sequence is located on the X chromosome.\n\nMisuse of multi-symptom cold medications, rather than using a cough suppressant whose sole active ingredient is dextromethorphan, carries significant risk of fatality or serious illness. Multi-symptom cold medicines contain other active ingredients, such as paracetamol (acetaminophen), chlorpheniramine, and phenylephrine, any of which can cause permanent bodily damage such as kidney failure, or even death, if taken on the generally accepted recreational dosing scale of dextromethorphan. Sorbitol, an artificial sweetener found in many cough syrups containing dextromethorphan, can also have negative side effects including diarrhea and nausea when taken at recreational dosages of dextromethorphan. Guaifenesin, an expectorant commonly accompanying dextromethorphan in cough preparations, can cause unpleasant symptoms including vomiting, nausea, kidney stones, and headache.\n\nCombining dextromethorphan with other substances can compound risks. Central nervous-system stimulants such as amphetamine and/or cocaine can cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure and heart rate. CNS depressants such as ethanol (drinking alcohol) will have a combined depressant effect, which can cause a decreased respiratory rate. Combining dextromethorphan with other CYP2D6 substrates can cause both drugs to build to dangerous levels in the bloodstream.\n\nCombining dextromethorphan with other serotonergic drugs could possibly cause serotonin toxicity, an excess of serotonergic activity in the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS).\n\nDextromethorphan's hallucinogenic and dissociative effects can be attributed largely to dextrorphan (DXO), a metabolite produced when dextromethorphan is metabolized by the body. Both dextrorphan \"and\" dextromethorphan are NMDA receptor antagonists, like the dissociative hallucinogenic drugs ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP), although dextrorphan is more potent than its \"parent molecule\" dextromethorphan.\n\nAs NMDA receptor antagonists, dextrorphan and dextromethorphan inhibit the excitatory amino acid and neurotransmitter glutamate in the brain. This can effectively slow, or even shut down certain neural pathways, preventing areas of the brain from communicating with each other. This leaves the user feeling dissociated or disconnected, experienced as brain fog or derealization.\n\nDextromethorphan's euphoric effects have sometimes been attributed to an increase in dopamine levels, since such an increase generally correlates with pleasurable responses to drug, as is observed with some clinical antidepressants, as well as some recreational drugs. However, the effects of dextrorphan and dextromethorphan, and other NMDA receptor antagonists, on dopamine levels is a disputed subject. Studies show that the NMDA receptor antagonists ketamine and PCP do raise dopamine levels, although other studies show that another NMDA receptor antagonist dizocilpine has no effect on dopamine levels. Some findings even suggest that dextromethorphan can actually \"counter\" the dopamine-increasing effect caused by morphine. Due to these conflicting results, the actual effect of dextromethorphan on dopamine levels remains undetermined.\n\nAntitussive preparations containing dextromethorphan are legal to purchase from pharmacies in most countries, with some exceptions being UAE, Sweden, Estonia and Latvia.\n\nIn Russia, dextromethorphan (commonly sold under the brand names Tussin+ and Glycodin) is a Schedule III controlled substance and is placed in the same list as benzodiazepines and the majority of barbiturates.\n\nNo legal distinction currently exists in the United States between medical and recreational use, sale, or purchase. Some states and store chains have implemented restrictions, such as requiring signatures for DXM sale, limiting quantities allowable for purchase, and requiring that purchasers be over the age of majority in their state.\n\nThe sale of dextromethorphan in its pure powder form may incur penalties, although no explicit law exists prohibiting its sale or possession, other than in the state of Illinois. There have been cases of individuals being sentenced to time in prison and other penalties for selling pure dextromethorphan in this form, because of the incidental violation of more general laws for the sale of legitimate drugs — such as resale of a medication without proper warning labels.\n\nDextromethorphan was excluded from the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of 1970 and was specifically excluded from the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. As of 2010, Dextromethorphan was still excluded from U.S. scheduling of controlled substances; however, officials have warned that it could still be added if increased abuse warrants its scheduling. The motivation behind its exclusion from the CSA was that, under the CSA, all optical isomers of listed Schedule II opiates are automatically Schedule II substances. Since dextromethorphan is an optical isomer of the Schedule II opiate levomethorphan (but does not act like an opiate), an exemption was necessary to keep it a non-controlled substance. The Federal Analog Act does not apply to dextromethorphan because a new drug application has been filed for it.\n\nAfter previously available over the counter, The National Agency of Drug and Food Control of Republic of Indonesia (BPOM-RI) prohibit single component dextromethorphan drug sales with or without prescription. Indonesia is the only country in the world that makes single-component dextromethorphan illegal even by prescription and violators may be prosecuted by law. Indonesian National Narcotic Bureau (BNN RI) has even threatened to revoke pharmacies' and drug stores' licenses if they still stock dextromethorphan, and will notify the police for criminal prosecution. As a result of this regulation, 130 drugs have been withdrawn from the market, but drugs containing multicomponent dextromethorphan can be sold over the counter. In its official press release, BPOM-RI also stated that dextromethorphan is often used as a substitute for marijuana, amphetamine, and heroin by drug abusers, and its use as an antitussive is less beneficial nowadays\n\nThe Director of Narcotics, Psychotropics, and Addictive Substances Control (NAPZA) BPOM-RI, Dr. Danardi Sosrosumihardjo, SpKJ, explains that dextromethorphan, morphine, and heroin are derived from the same tree, and states the effect of dextromethorphan to be equivalent to 1/100 of morphine and injected heroin.\nBy contrast, the Deputy of Therapeutic Product and NAPZA Supervision BPOM-RI, Dra. Antonia Retno Tyas Utami, Apt. MEpid., states that dextromethorphan, being chemically similar to morphine, has a much more dangerous and direct effect to the central nervous system, thus causing mental breakdown in the user. She also claimed, without citing any prior scientific study or review, that unlike morphine users, dextrometorphan users cannot be rehabilitated. This claim is contradicted by numerous scientific studies which show that naloxone alone offers effective treatment and promising therapy results in treating dextromethorphan addiction and poisoning. Dra. Antonia Retno Tyas Utami also claimed high rates of dextromethorphan abuse, including fatalities, in Indonesia and to be further put in question suggest that codeine, despite being a more physically addictive µ-opioid class antitussive, be made available as an alternative to dextromethorphan.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8880", "title": "Dryope", "text": "Dryope\n\nIn Greek mythology, Dryope (; derived from δρῦς \"drys\", \"oak\"; \"dryope\" \"woodpecker\") is the name attributed to several distinct figures: \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8881", "title": "Doctor (title)", "text": "Doctor (title)\n\nDoctor is an academic title that originates from the Latin word of the same spelling and meaning. The word is originally an agentive noun of the Latin verb \"\" 'to teach'. It has been used as an academic title in Europe since the 13th century, when the first doctorates were awarded at the University of Bologna and the University of Paris. Having become established in European universities, this usage spread around the world. Contracted \"Dr\" or \"Dr.\", it is used as a designation for a person who has obtained a Doctorate (e.g. PhD). In many parts of the world it is also used by medical practitioners, regardless of whether or not they hold a doctoral-level degree.\n\nThe doctorate () appeared in medieval Europe as a license to teach () at a medieval university. Its roots can be traced to the early church when the term \"doctor\" referred to the Apostles, church fathers and other Christian authorities who taught and interpreted the Bible. The right to grant a \"licentia docendi\" was originally reserved to the church which required the applicant to pass a test, take an Oath of allegiance and pay a fee. The Third Council of the Lateran of 1179 guaranteed the access – now largely free of charge – of all able applicants, who were, however, still tested for aptitude by the ecclesiastic scholastic. This right remained a bone of contention between the church authorities and the slowly emancipating universities, but was granted by the pope to the University of Paris in 1213 where it became a universal license to teach (\"licentia ubiquie docendi\"). However, while the licentia continued to hold a higher prestige than the bachelor's degree (\"Baccalaureus\"), it was ultimately reduced to an intermediate step to the Magister and doctorate, both of which now became the exclusive qualification for teaching.\n\nThe earliest doctoral degrees (theology, law, and medicine) reflected the historical separation of all university study into these three fields. Over time the D.D. has gradually become less common and studies outside theology, law, and medicine have become more common (such studies were then called \"philosophy\", but are now classified as sciences and humanities – however this usage survives in the degree of Doctor of Philosophy).\n\nThe Ph.D. was originally a degree granted by a university to learned individuals who had achieved the approval of their peers and who had demonstrated a long and productive career in the field of philosophy (in the broad sense of the term, meaning the pursuit of knowledge). The appellation of \"Doctor\" (from Latin: teacher) was usually awarded only when the individual was in middle age. It indicated a life dedicated to learning, knowledge, and the spread of knowledge. The Ph.D. entered widespread use in the 19th century at Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin as a degree to be granted to someone who had undertaken original research in the sciences or humanities. Prior to the formal degree, the contemporary doctorate (PhD), arguably, arose in Leipzig as a successor to the Master's (MA) degree in 1652 (Dr. habil).\n\nIn some European countries, such as Italy and Portugal, Doctor became a title given to all or most degree holders, not just those with doctorates. \nAs a result, the title is used by many professionals in these countries, including those such as lawyers who are not normally granted the title elsewhere. The title is also used for lawyers in South America, where they have traditionally earned doctoral degrees, as well as in the former Portuguese territory of Macau in China.\n\nThe primary meaning of \"Doctor\" in English has historically been with reference to the holder of a doctoral degree. These particularly referred to the ancient faculties of divinity, law and medicine, sometimes with the addition of music, which were the only doctoral degrees offered until the 19th century. During the 19th century, Ph.D.s became increasingly common in Britain, although to obtain the degree it was necessary to travel to continental Europe or (from 1861) to the United States, as the degree was not awarded in the UK until 1917.\n\nHowever, the title, not being protected by law, was adopted by quacks. As a result, by the mid 19th century, it was normal in the UK to omit the title \"Dr\" when addressing letters to those holding doctoral degrees, and instead write the abbreviated form of the degree after the name, e.g. \"The Reverend Robert Phelps, D.D.\", \"Thomas Elliotson, Esq. M.D.\", or \"John Lindsey, Esq. Ph.D.\", in order to avoid classing academic doctors \"with the village apothecary and the farrier\" and various \"quacks in literature, science, or art\". In the US it similarly became customary to use post-nominals rather than the title of Doctor when addressing letters. All those with doctoral degrees continued to use the title professionally, although the title was not used socially.\n\nDespite being historically associated with doctorates in law, the title of \"doctor\" for lawyers has not customarily been used in English-speaking countries, where lawyers were traditionally not required to have a university degree and were trained by other lawyers by apprenticeship or in the Inns of Court. The exception being those areas where, up to the 19th century, civil law rather than common law was the governing tradition, including admiralty law, probate and ecclesiastical law: such cases were heard in the Doctor's Commons, and argued by advocates who held degrees either of doctor of civil law at Oxford or doctor of law at Cambridge. As such, lawyers practicing common law in England were not doctoral candidates and had not earned a doctorate. When university degrees became more common for those wanting to qualify as a lawyer in England, the degree awarded was the Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.). Similarly in the US, even though degrees became standard for lawyers much earlier, the degree was again the LL.B., only becoming the Juris Doctor generally in the latter half of the 20th century.\n\nIn many English-speaking countries, it is common to refer to physicians by the title of doctor, even when they do not hold a doctoral level qualification. The word \"Doctor\" has long had a secondary meaning in English of physician, e.g. in Johnson's Dictionary, which quotes its use with this meaning by Shakespeare. In the US, the medical societies established the proprietary medical colleges in the 19th century to award their own MDs, but in the UK and the British Empire, where degree granting was strictly controlled, this was not an option. The usage of the title to refer to medical practitioners, even when they didn't hold doctoral degrees, was common by the mid 18th century. However, the first official recognition of Doctor being applied as a title to medical practitioners regardless of whether they held a doctoral degree was in 1838, when the Royal College of Physicians resolved that it would \"regard in the same light, and address by the same appellation, all who have obtained its diploma, whether they have graduated elsewhere or not.\"\n\nThe Medical Act 1858 made it illegal for anyone not qualified in medicine to use a title that implied they were. This led to prosecutions of people making unauthorised use of the title\"Dr\". However, it also called into question the use of the title by licentiates of the Colleges of Physicians – all of whom were, under the new act, allowed to practice throughout the UK. In 1859, the London College reversed its earlier decision, resolving \"That the title of Doctor shall not be given in any official document issued from this College to any person who is not possessed of the Degree of Doctor of Medicine\". This was followed up in 1860 by new bylaws that stated \"No Fellow, Member, or Licentiate of the College shall assume the title of Doctor of Medicine, or use any other name, title, designation or distinction implying that he is a Graduate in Medicine of an University, unless he be a Graduate in Medicine of an University\". In Ireland, the question of whether the license of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland granted the title of Doctor of Medicine led to a court case in 1861, with the conclusion that it did not. The \"British Medical Journal\" (\"BMJ\") observed, however, that anyone wanting the right to the title of \"Doctor\" could gain it \"with a five-shilling degree of Doctor of Philosophy\" from abroad, or could simply assume the title, as only \"Doctor of Medicine\" was actually protected. Debate continued as to the use of \"Doctor\" as a courtesy title by those who did not use it by right as holders of doctoral degrees, with the \"BMJ\" noting in 1876 that \"We have again a sort of flood of letters for and against the use of the title of Doctor by physicians\" and in 1882 that \"There is not any other subject which appears to excite so wide spread an interest as this\". In February 1876, a report recommended that the Royal College of Physicians should use the courtesy title of Doctor for all fellows and members, but this was rejected. Then in April of the same year, the College amended its bylaws to forbid any fellow, member, extra-licentiate or licentiate from using the title of Doctor unless they had a doctorate in medicine from a recognised university – closing the loophole the \"BMJ\" had identified. It was not until the early 20th century that this was reversed. In 1905 the Royal College of Surgeons passed a motion instructing their council \"to take the necessary steps in conjunction with the Royal College of Physicians to ensure that all persons who pass the Conjoint examination shall be legally entitled to call themselves Doctors\". The council of the surgeons' College felt it to be impractical to secure the legal right to the title as this would mean gaining the right to award M.D.s, but noted that the title had been used by the public to refer to medics for generations and was used without any legal right by Bachelors of Medicine – the only obstacle to licentiates of both colleges doing the same was the prohibition in the physicians' bylaws. On this occasion the College of Physicians refused to act, but they did finally relent in 1912, removing the clause forbidding the assumption of the title of Doctor. This was described in the American press as \"the British apostles of red-tape have been forced to bow to the popular will\".\n\nRegulation of the medical profession also took place in the United States in the latter half of the 19th century, preventing quacks from using the title of Doctor. However, medical usage of the title was far from exclusive, with it being acknowledged that other doctorate holders could use the title and that dentists and veterinarians frequently did. \"The Etiquette of To-day\", published in 1913, recommended addressing letters to physicians \"(full name), M.D.\" and those to other people holding doctorates \"Dr. (full name)\", although both were \"Dr.\" in the salutation and only physicians were explicitly said to include their title on their visiting card. By the 1920s there were a great variety of doctorates in the US, many of them taking entrants directly from high school, and ranging from the Doctor of Chiropractic (DC), which (at the time) required only two or three years of college-level education, up to the PhD. All doctoral degree holders, with the exception of the JD, were customarily addressed as \"Doctor\", but the title was also regularly used, without doctoral degrees, by pharmacists, ministers of religion, teachers and chiropodists, and sometimes by other professions such as beauty practitioners, patent medicine manufacturers, etc.\n\nBy the 1940s, the widespread usage of the title in the US was under threat. A 1944 article claimed that \"the Ph.D. has immediate and far-reaching value of social as well as economic nature\" due to America's \"national fondness for the tinsel of titles\", but went on to note that some universities were moving away from using the title, concluding that \"it is ungracious in most environments not to render unto the Doctor of Philosophy his 'Doctor' title\". The same writer noted in a letter to the \"Journal of Higher Education\" in 1948 that Alfred University had banned the use of the title for faculty (while retaining it for the president and deans) \"in a strange move professedly designed to uphold and promote 'democracy' and 'Americanism. However, it was noted in 1959 that professors with PhDs were now generally addressed as \"Doctor\", with the title of \"Professor\" sometimes being substituted for those without doctorates, leading to a decline in the perceived value of that title.\nIn the 1960s the inconsistent usage at American universities and colleges was mentioned in the \"New York Times Book Review\" and the editor of \"Science\" noted that: \"In some universities, administrators call all Ph.D.'s 'Mister,' but students and colleagues call them 'Doctor.' Often, but not always, Ph.D.'s are 'Misters' socially. In industry and government, both socially and professionally, they are 'Doctors,' as they are also in the pages of the \"New Yorker\", \"Time\", the \"Saturday Review\", and the New York \"Times\".\" In 1965, the League of Women Voters designated medical doctors \"Dr.\" and PhDs \"Mr.\" at a hustings in Princeton, leading to a letter of protest in \"Science\"; it was reported that the League believed PhDs would be embarrassed by the title, and that etiquette writers differed in whether PhDs used the title. In 1970, reverse snobbism in the face of the rising number of \"discount doctorates\" was linked to professors at prestigious universities wanting to be called \"mister\".\n\nIn the late 1960s the rising number of American law schools awarding Juris Doctor (JD) degrees led to debate over whether lawyers could ethically use the title \"Doctor\". Initial informal ethics opinions, based on the Canons of Professional Ethics then in force, came down against this. These were then reinforced with a full ethics opinion that maintained the ban on using the title in legal practice as a form of self-laudation (except when dealing with countries where the use of \"Doctor\" by lawyers was standard practice), but allowed the use of the title in academia \"if the school of graduation thinks of the J.D. degree as a doctor's degree\". These opinions led to further debate. The introduction of the new Code of Professional Responsibility in 1969 seemed to settle the question – in states where this was adopted – in favour of allowing the use of the title. There was some dispute over whether only the PhD-level Doctor of Juridical Science should properly be seen as granting the title, but ethics opinions made it clear that the new Code allowed JD-holders to be called \"Doctor\", while reaffirming that the older Canons did not. As not all state bars adopted the new Code, and some omitted the clause permitting the use of the title, confusion over whether lawyers could ethically use the title \"Doctor\" continued.\n\nThroughout much of the academic world, the term \"\"Doctor\"\" refers to someone who has earned a doctoral degree (highest degree) from a university. This is normally the Doctor of Philosophy, abbreviated PhD (sometimes Ph.D. in North America) from the Latin \"Philosophiae Doctor\" or DPhil from its English name, or equivalent research doctorates at level 8 of the International Standard Classification of Education 2011 classifications (ISCED 2011) or level 6 of the ISCED 1997 classifications. Beyond academia, \"Doctor\" as a noun normally refers to a medical practitioner, who would usually hold a qualification at level 7 of ISCED 2011/level 5 of ISCED 1997 such as the British MBBS or the American MD.\n\nWhen addressing several people, each of whom holds a doctoral title, one may use the plural contraction \"Drs\" (or \"Drs.\" in American English) – or in some languages (for example, German) \"Dres.\" () may be used – for example, instead of Dr. Miller and Dr. Rubinstein: Drs. Miller and Rubinstein. When referring to relatives with the same surname the form \"The Doctors Smith\" can be used. The abbreviation Drs. can also refer to doctorandus, a Dutch academic title.\n\nIn English, Dr is not combined with other titles, except for The Reverend in \"The Revd Dr\" before the surname of a minister of religion, e.g., \"The Revd Dr Smith\" but \"The Revd John Smith, DD\", and similarly \"Rabbi Dr\". Usage in many other languages is similar but some, notably German, allow for the stacking of titles.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, Hong Kong, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Ghana and other countries whose cultures were recently linked to the UK, the title \"Dr\" is generally used both for those who hold doctoral degrees and for registered medical practitioners. History has dictated the use of the courtesy title \"Dr\" by physicians and general practitioners. However, surgeons do not use the title of \"Dr\" but, due to the origins of surgery with the barber surgeons, instead use \"Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss\", etc. This custom applies to surgeons of any grade who have passed the appropriate exams and is not the exclusive province of consultant-level surgeons. In recent times, other surgically orientated specialists, such as gynaecologists, have also adopted these prefixes. A surgeon who is also a professor is usually known as \"Professor\" and, similarly, a surgeon who has been ennobled, knighted, created a baronet or appointed a dame uses the corresponding title (Lord, Sir, Dame). Physicians, on the other hand, when they pass their \"MRCP(UK)\" examinations, or equivalent, do not drop \"Dr\" but retain it, even as consultants. The status and rank of consultant surgeons, addressed as \"Mister\", and consultant physicians, addressed as \"Doctor\", is equivalent.\n\nIn Bangladesh, use of the title of Doctor (Dr.) is permitted for Ph.D. degree holders and registered medical practitioners. According to an amendment, universities are allowed to approve or reject any subject proposed for a thesis by a candidate for the degree of \"Doctor\" in any subject. For registered medical practitioners, only MBBS and BDS degree holders are allowed to use the title \"Dr.\" and be called \"Medical Doctors\". Registered veterinary practitioners may use the title \"Dr.\" after earning the \"Doctor of Veterinary Medicine\" (DVM) degree. However, Registered Homeopath practitioners also use the title \"Dr.\" even though, according to Homeopathic Practitioners Ordinance 1983, they are only permitted to use \"Homeopath\". Currently, Physiotherapy has no separate council and no authorized act at present permits the use of the prefix \"Dr.\" for physiotherapist. According to Bangladesh Unani & Ayurvedic Practitioners Ordinance 1983, practitioners of the Unani system are called “Tabib” or “Hakim” and are strictly prohibited from using the title \"Dr.\"; similarly, practitioners of Ayurvedic system are called “Vaid” or “Kabiraj” and are also strictly prohibited from using \"Dr.\". Currently, medical practitioners having MBBS degree or dental surgeons having BDS are legally permitted to use \"Dr.\" prefix. Using \"Dr.\" for other medical practitioners remains controversial.\n\nHong Kong follows British practice in calling physicians \"Doctor\" even though many of them hold only a degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS or MBChB). An attempt by their professional body to prevent chiropractors from calling themselves \"Doctor\" failed in the courts, in part because it was pointed out that practicing chiropractors may hold an academic doctorate in their discipline, and it would be anomalous to prevent them using the title when holders of doctorates in non-medical disciplines faced no such restriction.\n\nIn India, a person who has completed the Doctoral academic research requirements (usually consisting of rigorous prescribed course work followed by the publication of a thesis which makes a substantial contribution to existing knowledge, or a Doctoral dissertation embodying the results of guided research and public defence of their thesis in an Open Viva Voce) when awarded with a PhD (or any other Doctoral level degree) by a University recognised by The University Grants Commission of India or an Institution of National Importance, is Individually entitled by Right to be addressed as \"Doctor\" and prefix the abbreviation Dr. to their name.\nHowever, General Practitioners in the field of medicine (even though holding Bachelor level degrees such as MBBS, BDS ) are usually addressed as Doctor, by courtesy to the Noble Profession, (though the appellation \"Doctor\" in this case is used as a noun to refer generically to any practitioner of medicine rather than as an adjective indicating the level of the degree attained by the individual physician). This is exemplified by the fact that even practitioners of AYUSH systems of Medicine and Pharmacists and Physiotherapists are routinely referred to as \"Doctors\" (though the appropriate term for practitioners of AYUSH alternative medicine (BAMS, BHMS, BUMS, BSMS, BNYS, DNYS) would be Vaid, Yogi, Hakim, Siddhar and Homoeopath, Naturopath respectively, considerly the appropriate appellation in cases of Pharmacists the correct term would be Assistant Physician or Up-Vaid (Ayurveda) .\nHowever, lawyer or medical professional earning a Doctoral Degree in the respective fields (Ph.D. in Law or MD in Medicine etc.) becomes entitled to be addressed as \"Doctor\" individually by right and not mere convention or courtesy to his profession.\n\nThe Indonesian titles \"dr.\" is used in front of the name of medical doctor who holds a specification as general practitioner, also when the doctor already holds his specialization to ___, such as \"Sp.THT\" or \"Spesialis Telinga, Hidung, Tenggorokan\" (ENT or Ear, Nose, and Throat Specialist).\n\nDr. is used in front of the name as the title \"Doktor\" for doctorate title, the same level as Ph.D. title.\n\nIn Pakistan, the title of Doctor (Dr.) can be used both by Ph.D. degree holders and medical doctors. DVM (Doctor of Veterinary Medicine) degree holders use the title Dr. or Vet. Dr.\n\nIn 2004 the Pharmacy Council of Pakistan (PCP) approved the awarding of a Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD), a five-year professional degree. This was followed by the Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT), approved by the Pakistan Physical Therapy Association (PPTA) in 2010. The use of the title of Doctor by pharmacists and physiotherapists holding these degrees is disputed. In March 2015, the PCP affirmed its use by holders of the PharmD, following a similar affirmation in November 2014 by the Punjab Pharmacy Council. However the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council (PMDC) issued a directive in July 2015 barring pharmacists and physiotherapists from using the title. The right of the PMDC to issue such a directive has been questioned, as they are not the regulatory body for pharmacists or physiotherapists.\n\nIn the Philippines, titles and names of occupations usually follow Spanish naming conventions which utilize gender-specific terms. \"\"Doktór\"\" is the masculine form, which retains the abbreviation \"Dr.\"; the feminine form is \"\"Doktóra\"\", and is abbreviated usually as \"\"Dra.\"\"; others, however, some being Anglophones who wish to sound modern and Westernised (or were raised in an almost exclusively English-speaking family environment), or some who advocate gender equality, would dispense with the distinction altogether. There does exist in Filipino an equivalent, gender-neutral term for the professional that carries the more general notion of \"healer\", traditional (for example, an \"albuláryo\") or otherwise: \"manggagámot\".\n\nIn Sri Lanka the title doctor \"Dr.\" is used for both physicians (including dentists and veterinarians) and Ph.D. holders. However, when addressing in native Sinhalese a physician is addressed as \"Vaidya\" (වෛද්ය) or \"Dosthara\" (දොස්තර) while a Ph.D. holder is addressed as \"Aacharya\" (ආචාර්ය).\n\nThe usage of Doctor (ดอกเตอร์) or Dr (ดร.) has been borrowed from English. It can be seen as a title in academic circles and in the mass media. In contrast to other academic titles (Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor), the use of Doctor as a title has not been recognized by the Royal Institute of Thailand. Therefore, this title, in theory, cannot be used officially. For example, in court of justice where strictly formal Thai language is used, Dr cannot be mentioned as a person's title.\n\nCanada lies somewhere between British and American usage of the degree and terminology of \"doctor\". Research doctorates – PhDs and ScDs – are entitled to use the title \"doctor\". Healthcare professions for which members may be called by the title of doctor are: medicine, dentistry, clinical psychology, optometry, chiropractic, veterinary medicine, podiatry and, more recently, pharmacy. In Alberta, Registered Nurses or Nurse Practitioners with an earned doctoral degree may use the title \"doctor\" in conjunction with professional practice. Members of these professions generally complete a minimum of 2 years of undergraduate studies, followed by a four- to six-year professional program (considered, despite the name of the degree, to be at bachelor's-level) to earn the Doctor of Medicine (M.D.), Doctor of Dental Surgery (D.D.S.), Doctor of Psychology (Psy.D.), Doctor of Optometry (O.D.), Doctor of Chiropractic (D.C.) or Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (D.V.M.). In some provinces it is also possible to earn the Doctor of Podiatric Medicine (D.P.M) or Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm.D.). In some provinces, such as Ontario, psychologists take a PhD in Psychology rather than the PsyD degree. In Ontario, only chiropractors, dentists, medical doctors, optometrists and psychologists can use the title \"doctor\", when offering or purporting to offer health related services, while registered naturopathic doctors (N.D.) may only use the title \"doctor\" in written format if they also use the phrase, \"naturopathic doctor\" immediately following their name. A 2006 amendment that would allow practitioners of Traditional Chinese Medicine to use the title has not, as of 1 August 2016, entered into force.\n\nSome confusion has recently arisen with respect to Canada's legal profession, after many Canadian law schools started offering to grant the J.D. (\"Juridicae Doctor\" or \"Juris Doctor\") degree (considered, like the medical professional degrees, to be at bachelor's level) to their existing students and to their alumni - as a replacement for the degree they traditionally awarded: the LL.B. (\"Legum Baccalaureus\" or \"Bachelor of Laws\"). The course requirements did not change, only the name. Canadian law schools started offering this option to their graduates to make it easier to practise in the United States (where law schools have traditionally granted a J.D. rather than an LL.B.). The convention governing use of the title \"Dr\" by lawyers has not changed in Canada. The only lawyers who typically use \"Dr\" are those who have continued with their studies, in order to obtain both an LL.M. (\"Legum Magister\" or \"Master of Laws\") and an S.J.D. (\"Scientiae Juridicae Doctor\" or \"Doctor of the Science of the Law\"). Sometimes also referred to as a \"J.S.D.\", the S.J.D. degree is legal discipline's equivalent to a Ph.D. degree. The McGill University Faculty of Law offers a doctoral level program in law, but it grants a D.C.L. (\"Doctor of Civil Law\") instead. To save money, some Canadian law schools (including U.B.C. and Calgary) have opted to work with their respective faculties of graduate studies to offer Ph.D. degrees in law instead of founding new S.J.D. programs.\n\nThe usage of the French \"Docteur\" and \"Docteure\", and their abbreviated forms \"Dr\", \"Dre\", \"D\" and \"D\", is controlled by the \"Code des professions\". As a pre-nominal title it can be used without any further explication by physicians, veterinarians, and dentists. It can also be used prenominally, when accompanied by the name of the profession immediately after the name, by professionals who require a doctorate for their professional licence, such as psychology or chiropractic, e.g. \"Dr X, psychologue\" or \"Dr Y, chiropraticien\". Academic doctors, where the doctorate is not required to practice, bear the title only after their name; this is not abbreviated, e.g. \"M. Z, docteur en philosophie\" not \"M. Z, Ph.D.\"\n\nIn the United States, the use of the title \"Doctor\" is dependent upon the setting. The title is commonly used socially by physicians and those holding doctoral degrees; however, there was formerly a division between Letitia Baldrige and Miss Manners on its social usage by those who are not physicians. Baldrige saw this usage as acceptable, while in contrast, Miss Manners wrote that \"only people of the medical profession correctly use the title of doctor socially,\" but supports those who wish to use it in social contexts in the spirit of addressing people according to their wishes. Miss Manners has since softened her approach, noting in her Washington Post column that there are two approaches: \"having been earned, it should be used\" and \"that level of education being assumed, it need not be expressly mentioned\"; while she maintains that everyone should be addressed according to their wishes, she no longer states that only medical professionals use the title correctly but instead acknowledges that the title has been earned by those with Ph.D.s. The Emily Post Institute similarly advises that \"Socially as well as professionally, medical doctors, dentists, and other professionals are addressed by, and introduced with, their titles. People who have earned a Ph.D. or any other academic, nonmedical doctoral degree have the choice of whether to use \"Dr.\" both professionally and socially.\" Other advice columns have also noted that \"it has become common to see someone with a Ph.D. addressed on the envelope as Dr., and as a consequence, deviation from convention has become acceptable.\" It should be noted that while the usage of the title by Ph.D. graduates has become common, its use socially by holders of professional doctorates (other than physicians) is neither explicitly endorsed nor explicitly discouraged by writers on etiquette. Miss Manners has, however, stated that a physician who has had their license revoked should be addressed by their former preferred honorific (i.e. not according to their M.D. degree). It is unusual for those who hold honorary doctorates to use the title \"Doctor\".\n\nRecent publications from the office of the President of the United States of America also refer to Ph.D. holders as Dr. Soandso,\nand Second Lady Jill Biden used the style \"Dr. Jill Biden\" after earning her Ph.D. For addresses (defined as \"the conventional forms of address as determined by social and official custom\"), NASA uses \"Dr. (full name)\" in addresses for Ph.D. holders while for physicians it uses \"(full name), MD\", although both are addressed as \"Dr. (surname)\" in the salutation (which is described as \"informal\"). The National Institutes of Health similarly use \"Dr. (surname)\" in salutations for people with an M.D., Ph.D. or D.D.S. They advise using full name followed by degrees in addressees, explicitly stating not to use the title \"Dr.\", although an example in the following paragraph does, in fact, use the title rather than giving degrees.\n\nMost newspapers in the US follow the AP Stylebook and reserve the title for medical doctors in their house styles; notable exceptions include the New York Times, which follows the preference of the individual when referring to PhD holders (although the title is not used for those with honorary doctorates),\nand the Wall Street Journal, which similarly prefers \"Dr.\" for Ph.D. holders and physicians (if this is the person's choice) while stating explicitly that the title is not used for lawyers with J.D.s or people with honorary doctorates. Until 1989, the Washington Post used the title for \"practitioners of the healing arts (including chiropractors and osteopaths) but not for holders of PhDs or honorary degrees\", after which it dropped its use entirely.\n\nThe expansion of professional doctorates in clinical fields in the late 20th and early 21st centuries has led to disputes between physicians and other medical professions over who can use the title in a clinical context. This has been interpreted by some as part of larger battles within medicine, such as who gets to treat patients first and who has prescribing authority. The American Medical Association calls for non-physicians (those not holding an M.D. or D.O.) who use the title \"Doctor\" and are in direct contact with patients to clarify that they are not physicians and to \"define the nature of their doctorate degree\", while the American Osteopathic Association opposes the use of the title by non-physicians in clinical settings absolutely as (in their view) \"such use deceives the public\". Contrary to this, the Emergency Nurses Association has adopted as a position statement that \"1. Nurses are entitled to have their educational degrees recognized and acknowledged in the same manner as other professions. 2. The proper title protection and use of accurate credentials is appropriate in the clinical setting. 3. When being addressed or introduced as doctor in the clinical environment, it is responsible \npractice for all healthcare providers to clarify their professional role. 4. Patients, families and the general public have a right and expectation to be informed \nregarding the credentials of their caregivers, including the use of the title “doctor”.\"\n\nThe American Medical Association launched a campaign in 2011 for states to adopt \"truth in advertising\" legislation. As a result, many states now have laws in place that protect the title of doctor when offering medical services. In some jurisdictions, the use of the title in health care is limited to those who have both a doctorate and are licensed to practice medicine, and there is a requirement that the field of the doctorate be disclosed. Some other jurisdictions require the practitioner to hold a doctorate and to disclose the field, but make no stipulations as to licensing. Professional boards may also place limits on its use by the practitioners they regulate, e.g. requiring either a Ph.D. in psychology or a Doctor of Psychology degree to use the title while practicing as a psychologist. Some states require name badges to be worn in medical facilities giving first name, licensure status, and staff position, although these laws may not explicitly address the use of the title \"Doctor\".\n\nThough lawyers in the United States do not customarily use the title, the law degree in that country is the Juris Doctor, a professional doctorate. Some J.D. holders in the United States use the title of doctor in professional situations, although ethics board decisions have varied on whether this is permissible or might mislead the public into believing the lawyer was medically qualified or had a PhD. It is also sometimes used by J.D. holders in academic situations. In 2011, \"Mother Jones\" published an article claiming that Michele Bachmann was misrepresenting her qualifications by using the \"bogus\" title Dr. based on her J.D. They later amended the article to note that the use of the title by lawyers \"is a (begrudgingly) accepted practice in some states and not in others\", although they maintained that it was rarely used as it \"suggests that you're a medical doctor or a Ph.D.—and therefore conveys a false level of expertise\".\n\nAmerican professional doctorates are not generally considered doctoral level degrees internationally, instead being classified as bachelor's or master's level. The ISCED mapping for these degrees, developed collaboratively between the US and UNESCO, places them at master's level. As a result, holders of MD, JD, PharmD, etc. may not be permitted to use the title of Doctor in countries, such as Germany, where this is strictly controlled.\n\nIn the European Union, the title of \"doctor\" refers primarily to holders of post-graduate research doctorates, such as the PhD. In many European languages the term \"doctor\" is distinct from a medical practitioner, which can be referred to as e.g. \"läkare\" in Swedish, \"Arzt\" in German, \"dokter\" or \"arts\" in Dutch, or \"lääkäri\" in Finnish.\n\nStandardisation of degrees into the three cycles of bachelor's–master's–doctorate across the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) is being carried out through the Bologna process, although not all EHEA member states have fully conformed to the 1999 Bologna declaration in favour of their own historic customs. With respect to the title \"doctor\", it should be noted that the Bologna process makes no prescriptions regarding the names of degrees nor the titles they may confer. However, under the Lisbon Recognition Convention, recognition of a foreign degree allows \"the use of an academic title, subject to the laws and regulations of the country in which recognition is sought\". According to the \"Explanatory report\", this means that: \"The competent authorities of the Parties may grant the right to use the title in the exact form in which it was awarded in the Party concerned or in any other form. They may alternatively grant the right to use the corresponding title of the country in which recognition is sought.\"\n\nIn Austria, the degree \"Doktor\" is granted to holders of research degrees (Dr. techn., Dr. phil., Dr. rer. nat., etc.).\n\nIn addition, the title of \"Doktor\" is granted to physicians (Dr. med. univ.) and dentists (Dr. med. dent.), which do not technically possess doctorate degrees, but Diplom-level degrees. A post-graduate research doctorate (Dr. med. univ. et sci. med.) can be obtained, for example, after three years post-graduate studies at a Faculty of Medicine.\n\nAll doctors may be addressed as \"Doktor ______\", and the title is usually contracted to \"Dr. ______\". Contrary to popular belief, \"Dr.\" is not part of the name but a degree like \"Mag.\" or \"Dipl.-Ing.\". It is not mandatory to use the title, although it can be added to official documents (driver's license, passport, etc.), if desired.\n\nIn Finland, the title of \"tohtori\" or \"doktor\" denotes holder of a research doctorate comparable to a PhD. Until recent years it was customary to first become licentiate (after the master's degree), which meant persons becoming doctors already had had quite a long academic career. Nowadays doctorate programs are available after the master's degree in many fields and becoming doctor at young age is much more common.\n\nGetting the doctorate requires advanced studies after the master's degree, writing a thesis, nowadays often a thesis by publication, and publicly defending the thesis.\n\nPhysicians are in Finnish referred to as \"lääkäri\" (physician) unless they have a research doctorate.\n\nIn France, the title of \"Docteur\" is only used generally for physicians (\"médecin\"), but can also be used (although this is uncommon) by dentists and pharmacists, along with holders of research doctorates. Medical professionals do not normally hold a doctorate, which in France is used only to refer to a research doctorate, but a \"State Diploma of Doctor of Medicine\" (\"Diplôme d'État de docteur en médecine\").\n\nThe law in France allows the title of Dr to be used professionally by the above medical professionals and by holders of research doctorates, with the field of their speciality being mentioned after the name. The courts have ruled that stating the specialisation is not necessary except in circumstances specifically related to professional practice; at other times the title alone may be used. The courts have also determined that questioning the right of the holder of a research doctorate to use the title Dr is a form of libel. The National Union of Hospital Scientists (\"Syndicat National des Scientifiques Hospitaliers\") launched a campaign in 2015 to raise awareness of the right of scientists to use the title.\n\nIn German language-speaking countries, the word \"Doktor\" refers to a research doctorate awardee in formal language (similar to a PhD), and is distinct from \"Arzt\", a medical practitioner, though colloquial use of the word \"Doktor\" for physician is common.\n\nIn Germany, the most common doctoral degrees are \"Dr. med.\" (medicine), \"Dr. med. dent.\" (dentistry), \"Dr. med. vet.\" (veterinary medicine), \"Dr. rer. nat.\" (natural sciences), \"Dr. phil.\" (humanities), \"Dr. iur.\" (law), \"Dr. rer. pol.\" (economic and political sciences, also as Dr. rer. oec. in Switzerland), \"Dr.-Ing.\" (engineering), and \"Dr. theol.\" (theology). All holders of doctoral degrees are appropriately addressed as \"Herr/Frau Dr. _____\" in all social situations.\n\nIn Germany, double doctorates are indicated in the title by \"\"Dr. Dr.\"\" or \"\"DDr.\"\" and triple doctorates as \"\"Dr. Dr. Dr.\"\" or \"\"DDDr.\"\". More doctorates are indicated by the addition of \"\"mult.\"\", such as \"\"Dr. mult.\"\". Honorary titles are shown with the addition of \"\"h.c.\"\", which stands for \"\"honoris causa\"\". Example: \"\"Dr. h.c. mult.\"\"\n\nAll people holding a doctorate from an EU member state are, since 2001, entitled to use and be titled (addressed) as \"Doctor\" or \"Dr.\" in all formal, legal and published communications without any further addenda. For academics with doctorates from non-EU member states, the qualification must be recognised formally (\"validated\") by the Federal Educational Ministry in Bonn. The recognition process can be done by the employer or employee and may be part of the official bureaucracy for confirming professional status and is dependent on individual bilateral agreements between Germany and other countries and, since 2007, the Lisbon Recognition Convention. An example of mutual recognition of Doctor titles among EU countries is the \"Bonn Agreement of November 14, 1994\", signed between Germany and Spain (prior to the general recognition of EU doctorates).\n\nIn 2008, The Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the Länder in the Federal Republic of Germany extended their 2001 decision to recognise EU PhDs to cover PhDs that were awarded in Australia, Israel, Japan, Canada, and some American universities. It was announced in 2012 that this would be further extended to cover PhDs awarded in New Zealand. PhDs that were awarded in the United States are recognized if the awarding institution is classified by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a \"Research University (high research activity)\" or as a \"Research University (very high research activity).\" Permission to use the title covers only scientific research degrees and does not extend to professional degrees such as the M.D. or J.D.\n\nIn Greece, the title \"Διδάκτωρ\" (\"didaktōr\") is used to reference holders of a doctorate degree, while the term \"Ιατρός\" (\"iatros\") is used for physicians of any specialty.\n\nIn Hungary, graduates of six-year medical schools (\"dr. med.\"), five-year dentistry schools (\"dr. med. dent.\"), five-year law schools (\"dr. jur.\") and five-year veterinary medical schools (\"dr. vet.\") receive the title of a \"doctor\" at the end of their studies, after completing and successfully defending their thesis; their undergraduate studies must have lasted for a minimum of three years. Completing a PhD research programme (or DLA in arts and music) also leads to the doctor title. Since 2008, also those who graduated of five-year pharmacy schools have the right to use the title \"dr\" (\"dr. pharm.\").\n\nA large part of Hungarians with doctor titles received their titles for research in the old academic system before PhD was introduced in Hungary. Since the introduction of PhD title (1993), the \"dr. univ\" title (given before 1993) is not recognised as a scientific title. The CSc \"Candidate of Science\" title was a scientific title in the old academic system and is now treated as an equivalent of PhD. CSc titles were awarded by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.\n\nBefore 1989, juris doctors were allowed to use the Dr. title in their name.\n\nThe highest level doctoral degree in Hungary is DSc \"Doctor of Sciences\", awarded by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. It is also called \"Doctor of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences\".\n\nThe title of doctor used to become a part of the name and was added as such to personal identity documents. This practice is still common and graduates after receiving their diploma would usually change their personal documents in order to officially indicate the achievement.\n\nUsage in Ireland is similar to that in the UK. The title of doctor is used for holders of doctoral degrees as well as for medical practitioners (except surgeons), dentists, and vets.\n\nThe first university of Western civilization, the University of Bologna, is located in Italy, where until modern times the only degree granted was that of the doctorate, and all other Italian universities followed that model. During the 20th century Italian universities introduced more advanced research degrees, such as the Ph.D., and now that it is part of the E.U. Bologna Process, a new three-year first degree, or \"laurea\" (equivalent to a B.A. of other countries), has been introduced. The old-style \"laurea\" is now known as \"laurea magistrale/specialistica\" (Bologna Process second cycle/ISCED 2011 Level 7). For historical reasons, even to this day, the title of \"dottore/dottoressa\" (abbrev. both as dott/dott.ssa or as dr./dr.ssa ) is awarded even to those who have studied for a \"laurea\". Upper levels of degree are anyway shown in the title, as those who obtain a master's degree can be referred to as \"dottore/dottoressa magistrale\" (masterly doctor) while those who achieve the relatively new program of \"dottorato di ricerca\" (research doctorate, equivalent of a Ph.D.), carry the title of \"dottore/dottoressa di ricerca\" (research doctor), which can be abbreviated as \"Dott. Ric.\" or \"Ph.D.\"\n\nIn Malta, the title of Doctor is used by academic doctors (with Ph.D.s), medical practitioners, dentists and lawyers. Its use by lawyers is due to the qualifying degree for practicing law having been the LLD until reforms in 2014, and has been described as \"historical baggage\" by the Dean of the University of Malta's law school. Lawyers do not generally use the title when practicing outside of Malta.\n\nIn the Dutch language the word \"dokter\" refers to a physician, whereas \"doctor\" refers to the academic title. The doctor title is abbreviated as dr. placed before the holders name (note the lowercase).\n\nTo enter a Dutch doctoral defense, the candidate must hold a validated master's degree (a master's degree of an acknowledged university, or a master equivalent degree validated on a case by case basis by the Dutch government). In some cases the candidate can be granted special dispensation if no master's degree is held.\nThere is no specific notation of the discipline in which the doctorate is obtained. Exceptions only exist for the disciplines with specific master titles of engineering \"ir.\" (\"ingenieur\", i.e. Engineer) and law \"mr.\" (\"meester\", i.e. Master of Law) where the title dr. is added to the original master title. For these disciplines, the original master's degree abbreviation is combined with the dr. abbreviation thus resulting in for example \"dr. ir. Familyman\". The dr. title is always placed in front of the ir. title. In the case of a PhD in law, the original mr. title is placed before the dr. title (mr. dr., see e.g. Jan Peter Balkenende). For a person having a law master's degree, but holding a PhD in another field than law the mr. title is placed after the dr. title (dr. mr.). No specific notation or title for the medical disciplines exists in the Netherlands. Although a physician is usually referred to as \"dokter\" (note the spelling difference) this does not necessarily imply the physician holds a doctoral degree; nor does it give the physician a title equivalent to that of PhD.\n\nConfusion can be caused by the original Dutch Master level title \"drs.\" (for all non-engineering and non-law master's degrees). This abbreviation stands for the Dutch title doctorandus Latin for \"he who should become a doctor\" (female form is \"doctoranda\"). Dutch drs. should not be confused with the plural 'doctorates': having a PhD in multiple disciplines. Once a doctorate is achieved the doctorandus is promoted to doctor, and no longer uses the drs. abbreviation.<br>\nStacking of multiples titles of the same level, as seen in countries like for example Germany (Dr. Dr. Dr. Musterfrau) is highly uncommon in the Netherlands (although stacking of titles with different levels is common: prof. dr. ir. Appelmans). Those who have multiple doctor titles may use dr.mult. before their name, although this is rarely used.\n\nAfter obtaining a doctorate successfully, Dutch doctors may bear either the title dr. (lower case) before, or the letter D (rarely in practice) behind their name, but not both simultaneously. In the Netherlands, Academic titles are used exclusively within academia. Holding a PhD title has become a standard requirement for a university career. The doctor title has little to no meaning or implications for public life outside academia. It cannot be added to documentation (e.g. passport, drivers licence), and is used infrequently in daily practice.\n\nHistorically, The Netherlands used their own academic degree nomenclature, but for many years now have recognised and implemented the Bologna declaration. In everyday practice, the Anglo Saxon titles (e.g. PhD) are frequently used. Dutch academic titles are legally protected. PhD degrees can only be granted by recognised (research) universities. Illegal use is considered a misdemeanor and subject to legal prosecution.\n\nIn Portugal, up to recent times after the completion of an undergraduate degree – except in architecture and engineering – a person was referred to as \"doutor (Dr.) – male\" or \"doutora (Dra.) – female\". The architects and engineers were referred by their professional titles: \"arquitecto\" (Arq.) and \"engenheiro\" (Eng.). Nurses ares also referred to as \"nurse\", \"enfermeiro\" (male) or \"enfermeira\" (female), the title being \"Enf.\" for both.\n\nNowadays Portugal is a signatory to the Bologna process and according to the current legislation the title of Doctor (\"doutor, doutora\") is reserved for graduate holders of an academic doctorate. Professions such as physicians, attorneys, pharmacists, veterinarians, and few others are usually referred to by the title Dr. (doutor) even if they have not been awarded a doctoral degree.\n\nHowever, custom gives the legislation little strength and most graduates use the Dr. title in its abbreviated form, although use of the full \"Doutor\" is normally restricted to those with doctorates.. Those who are both holders of an academic doctorate and Professors at a college level are generally referred to as Professor Doutor.\n\nThe social standing of Doctors in Spain is evidenced by the fact that only Ph.D. holders, Grandees and Dukes can take seat and cover their heads in the presence of the King.\n\nPh.D. Degrees are regulated by Royal Decree (R.D. 1393/2007), \"Real Decreto\" (in Spanish). They are granted by the University on behalf of the King, and its Diploma has the force of a public document. The Ministry of Science keeps a national database of doctoral theses called TESEO. Any person who uses the Spanish title of \"doctor/doctora\" (or \"Dr./Dra.\") without being included in this Government database can be prosecuted for fraud. However, the Spanish Royal Academy recognises that it is used colloquially to describe medics, even without doctoral degrees, as well as (in the feminine form, \"doctora\", abbreviated \"Dra.\") the wives of doctors (i.e. holders of doctoral degrees) and medics, as well as \"women who shine with wisdom and understanding\".\n\nUnlike other countries, until recently Spain has registered a comparatively small number of Doctor degree holders, but the tendency is changing. According to the Spanish Statistical Office (INE), less than 5% of M.Sc. degree holders are admitted to Ph.D. programs. This reinforces the prestige that Doctors have historically enjoyed in Spain's society.\n\nDoctor is commonly used in the United Kingdom as the title for a person who has received a doctoral degree or, as courtesy title, for a qualified medical practitioner or dentist who does not have a doctorate. There are no restrictions on the use of the title \"Doctor\" in the United Kingdom, except where, in commercial advertising, it might imply that the user holds a general medical qualification. The UK government allows medical doctors and holders of doctorates to have the title recorded on the observations page of their UK passport. The lack of legal restrictions was confirmed in Parliament in 1996 by health minister Gerald Malone, who noted that the title doctor had never been restricted by law to either medical practitioners or those with doctoral degrees in the UK, although the titles \"physician, doctor of medicine, licentiate in medicine and surgery, bachelor of medicine, surgeon, general practitioner and apothecary\" were protected.\n\nAccording to the etiquette guide, Debrett's, holders of doctoral degrees and medical doctors (but not surgeons) should be addressed as \"Doctor\". It should be noted that for medical doctors, \"Doctor\" is a professional title rather than an academic one: it is due to their being a doctor rather than their having gained a doctoral degree. The Quality Assurance Agency states that \"The use of the title 'Dr' by medical doctors is a historical abbreviation for the profession; it does not indicate a qualification at doctoral level\". On guest lists and seating plans for formal events, holders of academic doctorates (but not medical doctors or other people using the title as a courtesy title) are listed either as \"Dr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq, PhD\", while untitled men (other than those holding doctorates) are shown as either \"Mr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq\" (as appropriate to ensure the styling remains consistent). The title \"Dr\" is also used on visiting cards.\n\nMedical students in the UK normally complete a course of study leading to the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS, BMBS or MBChB). The MD degree is not a qualifying degree in the UK, but can be either a professional doctorate (at the same academic level as a PhD), a doctorate by thesis, or a higher doctorate, depending on the university. To be eligible for an MD degree in the UK one must already hold an entry level medical degree (for example, MBBS, MBChB, BMed, or a North American MD degree) and usually must have had at least 5 years of postgraduate training and experience. Trainee doctors are permitted to use the title Doctor once they have started their post-graduation \"Foundation Programme\".\n\nDebrett's states that medical doctors (except surgeons) should be addressed on envelopes as \"Dr (full name), (medical qualifications)\", e.g. \"Dr John Smith, MD\", \"Dr Anne Jones, MB BS, FRCP\", \"Dr David Evans, MB ChB\", contrary to the normal rule of not mixing titles and post-nominals. Surgeons (and dentists, if not holding a doctoral degree) should be \"(full name), Esq, (medical/dental qualifications)\", e.g. \"John Smith, Esq, MS, FRCS\", \"David Evans, Esq., BDS\", but \"Dr Anne Jones, DDS, FDS RCS\". By contrast, those holding (non medical or dental) doctoral degrees, if not surgeons, should be \"Dr (full name)\" without post-nominals on envelopes, e.g. \"Dr John Smith\". \n\nA & C Black's \"Titles and Forms of Address\" diverges from Debrett's on how to address envelopes to medical doctors, omitting the pre-nominal title of Dr (e.g. John Smith, Esq, MD; John Smith, MD; John Smith, MB) except in Scotland and for general practitioners, where the post-nominals are instead usually omitted (e.g. Dr John Smith). Black's also state that it is down to individual choice whether non-medical doctors are addressed on envelopes as \"Dr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq, PhD\" (or appropriate letters for the doctorate held), with the exception of doctors of divinity, who would be \"The Rev. J. Smith, DD\" on the envelope and \"Reverend Sir\" in a formal salutation (informally in the salutation \"Dear Dr Smith\", and \"Dr Smith\" in speech).\n\nThe custom of not referring to surgeons (members and fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons) as Dr has been commented on in the \"British Medical Journal\" and may stem from the historical origins of the profession such as that some barbers also used to function as surgeons. In 2005, the then-president of the Royal College of Surgeons called upon surgeons to use the title of Dr, saying that the use of Mr or Miss was confusing to patients. Black's note that gynaecologists are addressed as surgeons in England and Wales but as doctors elsewhere. \n\nIn a similar manner to the medical MBBS, dentists qualify with a Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) and vets with a Bachelor of Veterinary Science (BVSc), Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine (BVetMed) or Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (BVMS). All of these are, like the MBBS, master's level qualifications that bear bachelor's designations for historical reasons.\n\nDentists have traditionally (as dental surgeons) been referred to in the same way as surgeons, but since 1995 the General Dental Council have permitted dentists to use the title \"Doctor\", though many do not choose to do this, thereby stressing their surgeon status. However, Debrett's continues to advises that dentists are normally addressed as surgeons and that the title \"Doctor\" is usually only used for dentists who have a doctoral degree.\n\nOn 5 March 2015 the council of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) voted to permit its members to use the courtesy title of \"Doctor\". Guidance from the RCVS says the title should be used either with the description \"veterinary surgeon\" or the postnominals \"MRCVS\" to ensure there is no confusion with doctors of human medicine or holders of doctoral degrees.\n\nOptometrists are not permitted to use the title \"Doctor\" based on their initial qualification (BOptom or BSc (Optom)). Optometrists can earn PhDs or Doctor of Optometry degrees (in the UK a PhD-level qualification for qualified optometrists with experience in practice). Ophthalmologists are fully qualified medical doctors. However, ophthalmology is considered a branch of surgery, thus ophthalmologists, like other surgeons in the UK, do not use the title \"Doctor\".\n\nThe General Chiropractic Council permits registered chiropractors to use the title \"Doctor\", although it advises chiropractors to avoid using the title in advertising or, if they do, to spell out that they are \"Doctors of Chiropractic\". The Committee of Advertising Practice advises, however, that \"references to 'DC' or 'doctor of chiropractic' are unlikely to dispel that misleading impression [of being a medical practitioner], when used in conjunction with unqualified references to the prefix 'Dr, saying that the use of the title by chiropractors may be acceptable in advertising if \"clearly and prominently qualified with additional text which makes clear it is a courtesy title and that the practitioner does not hold a general medical qualification\".\n\nThe Advertising Standards Authority has ruled that practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine should not use the title doctor in adverts unless they hold a general medical qualification and are registered with the General Medical Council. It similarly advises that osteopaths should not use the title unless holding a general medical qualification. There have also been rulings that an advert for an osteomyologist which referred to him as a doctor was misleading, as was an advert which used the title \"Dr\" and the post-nominals \"PhD\" on the basis of a PhD from an unaccredited university.\n\nHolders of honorary doctorates in the UK have the right, in most cases, to use the title of Doctor, although holders are encouraged to refrain from doing so. Black's says that \"The same rules apply as to other holders\", although notes that the post-nominals would not normally be used. \n\nIn some circumstances, \"doctor\" may be used on its own as a form of address rather than as a title before a name. This is limited to when the person is being addressed by their job title and so is only used for medical doctors.\n\nWales follows UK usage in English. In Welsh, the holder of a doctoral degree is \"doethur\" while a medical doctor is \"doctor\" or \"meddyg\". The title \"\"y Doethur\"\" is used by those holding doctorates, e.g. \"y Doethur Brinley Jones\", \"y Doethur John Elfed Jones, which can be abbreviated \"Dr\". Medical doctors use, as in English, the title \"Doctor\", also abbreviated \"Dr\".\n\nWith the introduction of National Health Practitioner registration legislation on 1 July 2010, the title \"doctor\" is not restricted in any Australian state. The title \"medical practitioner\" is restricted for use by registered medical practitioners, while the title \"doctor\" is not restricted by law. Despite this, the Medical Board of Australia advises that practitioners who are not medical practitioners who choose to use the title 'Doctor' (or 'Dr') should clearly state their profession in advertisements, even if they hold a PhD or another doctoral degree, e.g. 'Dr Smith (Dentist)' or 'Dr Jones (Chiropodist)'. The Psychology Board of Australia prohibits psychologists from using the title, to avoid confusion with psychiatrists, unless they hold a doctoral degree, in which case they must make it clear that they are not a medical practitioner or psychiatrist, e.g. by putting '(Psychologist)' after their name. The Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) defines doctoral degrees as being at Level 10 of the framework; it specifies that: \"Individuals who have been awarded a Doctoral Degree at Level 10 on the AQF are entitled to use the title 'Doctor'. The title 'Doctor' will not be used by those who hold an honorary award.\" The name 'Doctor' is also used in the name of some extended master's degrees at Level 9 (e.g. Juris Doctor and Doctor of Medicine); these are not considered doctoral degrees.\n\nIn British English it is not necessary to indicate an abbreviation with a full stop (period) after the abbreviation, when the last letter of the abbreviation is the same as the unabbreviated word, while such a full stop is required in American English. This means that while the abbreviation of Doctor is usually written as \"Dr\" in most of the Commonwealth, it is usually written as \"Dr.\" in North America. However, the US Postal Service prefers punctuation to be omitted from addresses.\n\nSimilarly, conventions regarding the punctuation of degree abbreviations vary. In the United Kingdom, it is normal also to omit stops from postnominal letters, thus the usual abbreviation of \"Esquire\" in postnominals is \"Esq\", and the usual abbreviation for \"Doctor of Philosophy\" is \"PhD\" (or \"DPhil\", where this is used). The fully punctuated \"Ph.D.\" or \"D.Phil.\" is anachronistic and, where the abbreviated form of the degree is defined by regulation rather than custom (e.g. Oxford), may be technically incorrect.\n\nAn honorary doctorate is a doctoral degree awarded for service to the institution or the wider community. It may also be awarded for outstanding achievement in a particular field. This service or achievement does not need to be academic in nature. Often, the same set of degrees is used for higher doctorates, but they are distinguished as being \"honoris causa\": in comprehensive lists, the lettering used to indicate the possession of a higher doctorate is often adjusted to indicate this, for example, \"Hon. Sc.D.\", as opposed to the earned research doctorate \"Sc.D.\". The degrees of Doctor of the University (D.Univ.) and Doctor of Humane Letters (D.H.L.), however, are only awarded as honorary degrees.\n\nBy convention, recipients of honorary doctorates do not use the title \"Dr\" in general correspondence, although in formal correspondence from the university issuing the honorary degree it is normal to address the recipient by the title. However, this social convention is not always scrupulously observed; notable people who defied social convention and used the honorary prefix include:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8882", "title": "Domnall mac Ailpín", "text": "Domnall mac Ailpín\n\nDomnall mac Ailpín (Modern Gaelic: \"Dòmhnall mac Ailpein\", anglicised sometimes as Donald MacAlpin, known in most modern regnal lists as Donald I); (812 – 13 April 862) was King of the Picts from 858 to 862. He followed his brother Kenneth I to the Pictish throne.\n\nThe Chronicle of the Kings of Alba says that Domnall reigned for four years, matching the notices in the Annals of Ulster of his brother's death in February 858 and his own in April 862. The Chronicle notes:\nThe laws of Áed Find are entirely lost, but it has been assumed that, like the laws attributed to Giric and Constantine II (Causantín mac Áeda), these related to the church and in particular to granting the privileges and immunities common elsewhere. The significance of Forteviot as the site of this law-making, along with Kenneth's death there and Constantine's later gathering at nearby Scone, may point to this as being the heartland of the sons of Alpín's support.\n\nThe Chronicle of Melrose says of Domnall, \"in war he was a vigorous soldier ... he is said to have been assassinated at Scone.\" No other source reports Domnall's death by violence.\n\nThe Prophecy of Berchán may refer to Domnall in stanzas 123–124:\n\nAlthough Domnall is generally supposed to have been childless, it has been suggested that Giric was a son of Domnall, reading his patronym as \"mac Domnaill\" rather than the commonly supposed \"mac Dúngail\". This, however, is not widely accepted.\n\nDomnall died, either at the palace of Cinnbelachoir (location unknown), or at \"Rathinveralmond\" (also unknown, and may be the same place, presumed to be near the junction of the Almond and the Tay, near Scone). He was buried on Iona.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8884", "title": "Danse Macabre", "text": "Danse Macabre\n\nDance of Death, also called Danse Macabre (from the French language), is an artistic genre of late-medieval allegory on the universality of death: no matter one's station in life, the Dance of Death unites all. The \"Danse Macabre\" consists of the dead or personified Death summoning representatives from all walks of life to dance along to the grave, typically with a pope, emperor, king, child, and labourer. They were produced as mementos mori, to remind people of the fragility of their lives and how vain were the glories of earthly life. Its origins are postulated from illustrated sermon texts; the earliest recorded visual scheme was a now-lost mural in the Saints Innocents Cemetery in Paris dating from 1424 to 1425.\n\nThe earliest recorded visual example is from the cemetery of the Church of the Holy Innocents in Paris (1424–25). There were also painted schemes in Basel (the earliest dating from c.1440); a series of paintings on canvas by Bernt Notke, in Lübeck (1463); the initial fragment of the original Bernt Notke painting (accomplished at the end of the 15th century) in the St Nicholas' Church, Tallinn, Estonia; the painting at the back wall of the chapel of Sv. Marija na Škrilinama in the Istrian town of Beram (1471), painted by Vincent of Kastav; the painting in the Holy Trinity Church in Hrastovlje in Istria by John of Kastav (1490). There was also a Dance of Death painted in the 1540s on the walls of the cloister of St Paul's Cathedral, London with texts by John Lydgate, which was destroyed in 1549.\n\nThe deathly horrors of the 14th century—such as recurring famines; the Hundred Years' War in France; and, most of all, the Black Death—were culturally assimilated throughout Europe. The omnipresent possibility of sudden and painful death increased the religious desire for penitence, but it also evoked a hysterical desire for amusement while still possible; a last dance as cold comfort. The \"danse macabre\" combines both desires: in many ways similar to the mediaeval mystery plays, the dance-with-death allegory was originally a didactic dialogue poem to remind people of the inevitability of death and to advise them strongly to be prepared at all times for death (see \"memento mori\" and \"Ars moriendi\").\n\nShort verse dialogues between Death and each of its victims, which could have been performed as plays, can be found in the direct aftermath of the Black Death in Germany and in Spain (where it was known as the \"Totentanz\" and \"la Danza de la Muerte\", respectively). The French term \"danse macabre\" may derive from the Latin \"Chorea Machabæorum\", literally \"dance of the Maccabees.\" In 2 Maccabees, a deuterocanonical book of the Bible, the grim martyrdom of a mother and her seven sons is described, and was a well-known mediaeval subject. It is possible that the Maccabean Martyrs were commemorated in some early French plays or that people just associated the book's vivid descriptions of the martyrdom with the interaction between Death and its prey. An alternative explanation is that the term entered France via Spain, the , \"maqabir\" (cemetery) being the root of the word. Both the dialogues and the evolving paintings were ostensive penitential lessons that even illiterate people (who were the overwhelming majority) could understand.\nFurthermore, frescoes and murals dealing with death had a long tradition and were widespread, e.g. the legend of the Three Living and the Three Dead: on a ride or hunt, three young gentlemen meet three cadavers (sometimes described as their ancestors) who warn them, \"Quod fuimus, estis; quod sumus, vos eritis\" (What we were, you are; what we are, you will be). Numerous mural versions of that legend from the 13th century onwards have survived (for instance, in the hospital church of Wismar or the residential Longthorpe Tower outside Peterborough). Since they showed pictorial sequences of men and corpses covered with shrouds, those paintings are sometimes regarded as cultural precursors of the new genre.\n\nA \"danse macabre\" painting may show a round dance headed by Death or a chain of alternating dead and live dancers. From the highest ranks of the mediaeval hierarchy (usually pope and emperor) descending to its lowest (beggar, peasant, and child), each mortal's hand is taken by a skeleton or an extremely decayed body. The famous \"Totentanz\" by Bernt Notke in Lübeck's Marienkirche (destroyed during the Allied bombing of Lübeck in World War II) presented the dead dancers as very lively and agile, making the impression that they were actually dancing, whereas their living dancing partners looked clumsy and passive. The apparent class distinction in almost all of these paintings is completely neutralized by Death as the ultimate equalizer, so that a sociocritical element is subtly inherent to the whole genre. The \"Totentanz\" of Metnitz, for example, shows how a pope crowned with his mitre is being led into Hell by the dancing Death.\n\nUsually, a short dialogue is attached to each victim, in which Death is summoning him (or, more rarely, her) to dance and the summoned is moaning about impending death. In the first printed \"Totentanz\" textbook (Anon.: Vierzeiliger oberdeutscher Totentanz, Heidelberger Blockbuch, approx. 1460), Death addresses, for example, the emperor:\n\nAt the lower end of the \"Totentanz\", Death calls, for example, the peasant to dance, who answers:\n\nThe dance finishes (or sometimes starts) with a summary of the allegory's main point:\n\nThe famous designs by Hans Holbein the Younger (1497-1543) for his Dance of Death series were drawn in 1526 while he was in Basel. They were cut in wood by the accomplished Formschneider (block cutter) Hans Lützelburger. William Ivins (quoting W.J. Linton) writes of Lützelburger's work: \"'Nothing indeed, by knife or by graver, is of higher quality than this man's doing,' for by common acclaim the originals are technically the most marvelous woodcuts ever made.\" These woodcuts soon appeared in proofs with titles in German. The first book edition, containing forty-one woodcuts, was published at Lyons by the Treschsel brothers in 1538. The popularity of the work and the currency of its message are underscored by the fact that there were eleven editions before 1562 and over the sixteenth century perhaps as many as a hundred unauthorized editions and imitations. Ten further designs were added in later editions.\n\nThe \"Dance of Death\" (1523–26) refashions the late-medieval allegory of the \"danse macabre\" as a reformist satire, and one can see the beginnings of a gradual shift from traditional to reformed religion. That shift had many permutations however, and in a thoroughly detailed study Natalie Zemon Davis has shown that the contemporary reception and afterlife of Holbein's designs lent themselves to neither purely Catholic or Protestant doctrine, but could be outfitted with different surrounding prefaces and sermons as printers and writers of different political and religious leanings took them up. Most importantly, it was \"The pictures and the Bible quotations above them were the main attractions ... Both Catholics and Protestants wished, through the pictures, to turn men's thoughts to a Christian preparation for death.\".\n\nThe 1538 edition which contained Latin quotations from the Bible above Holbein's designs, and a French quatrain below composed by Gilles Corrozet, actually did not credit Holbein as the artist. It bore the title: Les simulachres & / HISTORIEES FACES / DE LA MORT, AUTANT ELE/gammēt pourtraictes, que artifi/ciellement imaginées. / A Lyon. / Soubz l'escu de COLOIGNE. / M.D. XXXVIII. (\"Images and Illustrated facets of Death, as elegantly depicted as they are artfully conceived.\") These images and workings of death as captured in the phrase \"historiees faces\" of the title \"are the particular exemplification of the way death works, the individual scenes in which the lessons of mortality are brought home to people of every station.\" In his preface to the work Jean de Vauzèle, the Prior of Montrosier, addresses Jehanne de Tourzelle, the Abbess of the Convent at St. Peter at Lyons, and names Holbein's attempts to capture the ever-present, but never directly seen, abstract images of death \"simulachres.\" He writes: \"... simulachres les dis ie vrayement, pour ce que simulachre vient de simuler, & faindre ce que n'est point.\" (\"Simulachre they are most correctly called, for simulachre derives from the verb to simulate and to feign that which is not really there.\") He next employs a trope from the memento mori (remember we all must die) tradition and a metaphor from printing which well captures the undertakings of Death, the artist, and the printed book before us in which these simulachres of death barge in on the living: \"Et pourtant qu'on n'a peu trouver chose plus approchante a la similitude de Mort, que la personne morte, on d'icelle effigie simulachres, & faces de Mort, pour en nos pensees imprimer la memoire de Mort plus au vis, que ne pourroient toutes les rhetoriques descriptiones de orateurs.\" (\"And yet we cannot discover any one thing more near the likeness of Death than the dead themselves, whence come these simulated effigies and images of Death's affairs, which imprint the memory of Death with more force than all the rhetorical descriptions of the orators ever could.\").\n\nHolbein's series shows the figure of \"Death\" in many disguises, confronting individuals from all walks of life. None escape Death's skeletal clutches, not even the pious. As Davis writes, \"Holbein's pictures are independent dramas in which Death comes upon his victim in the midst of the latter's own surroundings and activities. This is perhaps nowhere more strikingly captured than in the wonderful blocks showing the plowman earning his bread by the sweat of his brow only to have his horses speed him to his end by Death. The Latin from the 1549 Italian edition pictured here reads: \"In sudore vultus tui, vesceris pane tuo.\" (\"Through the sweat of thy brow you shall eat your bread\"), quoting Genesis 3.19. The Italian verses below translate: (\"Miserable in the sweat of your brow,/ It is necessary that you acquire the bread you need eat,/ But, may it not displease you to come with me,/ If you are desirous of rest.\"). Or there is the nice balance in composition Holbein achieves between the heavy-laden traveling salesman insisting that he must still go to market while Death tugs at his sleeve to put down his wares once and for all: \"Venite ad me, qui onerati estis.\" (\"Come to me, all ye who [labor and] are heavy laden\"), quoting Matthew 11.28. The Italian here translates: (\"Come with me, wretch, who are weighed down,/ Since I am the dame who rules the whole world:/ Come and hear my advice,/ Because I wish to lighten you of this load.\").\n\nMusical examples include\n\nDisney's animated Silly Symphonies short \"The Skeleton Dance\" (1929) makes extensive use of danse macabre imagery; the theme, as well as some of the animation from the film, would be recycled in a Mickey Mouse short, \"The Haunted House\", which was released the same year. It was also used in the Mickey Mouse Works short called \"Hansel and Gretel\" in 1998.\n\nIn \"The Seventh Seal\" (1956), by Swedish director Ingmar Bergman, the finale shows the characters united in a dance of death.\n\nIn Harold \"Herk\" Harvey's film \"Carnival of Souls\", a dans macabre occupies the finale.\n\nThe film \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\" (1979) includes a scene in which Lucy Harker walks through the town square of Wismar, encountering plague-ridden townsfolk who are dining and dancing, resigned to the inevitability of their deaths.\n\nIn \"The Graveyard Book\" (2008), by Neil Gaiman, there is a chapter where the main character, Bod, witnesses the rare occurrence of the living and the dead dancing for one night.\n\nThe video game \"Fable III\" (2010–11) has a tavern called the Last Order (found behind the demon door in Brightwall) that features a group of skeletal revelers drinking and dancing, and one is relieving himself.\n\nThe video game \"Alone in the Dark\" has a puzzle, if main character uses the gramophone in the ballroom, dance macabre melody starts to play and dancing ghosts appears.\n\nThe official sound track of Season II of anime \"Black Butler\" features a song called \"Danse Macabre\" that is heavily influenced by historical themes. The track is used in one episode as background music to a battle between two demons.\n\nIn \"Grimm (TV series)\" (2011- ) there is an episode titled \"Danse Macabre\" which centers on a prodigy violinist. The song is played during the episode.\n\nIn the film \"Kingdom of Heaven\" (2005), Balian of Ibelin sees the Danse Macabre mural in his father's house and reads the inscription which translates \"Quod Sumus hoc eritis\" as \"Such as we are, you will be\"\n\nSylvia Plath wrote the poem \"Danse macabre\" in 1955. Found in the \"Juvenilia\" section of her \"The Collected Poems of Sylvia Plath\" (HarperPerennial pp 320–321), it is one of Plath's more erotic poems.\n\nTheatre company Punchdrunk used a musical score of Dance Macabre in the climax of their promenade piece The Masque of the Red Death at Battersea Arts Centre\n\n\"Danse Macabre\" is a 1981 non-fiction book by Stephen King, about horror fiction in print, radio, film and comics, and the influence of contemporary societal fears and anxieties on the genre.\n\n\"Danse Macabre\" is the third studio album by the Omaha-based new wave band The Faint. It was released on August 21, 2001 in the U.S. and roughly a year later in the UK, where it has enjoyed similar popularity.\n\nThere is a danse macabre at the end of Woody Allen's 1975 film \"Love and Death\".\n\nIn the video game, \"Devil May Cry 3\" (2005), the main character Dante has a sword combo named Danse Macabre.\n\nIn Terry Goodkind's \"Sword of Truth\" novel universe, protagonist Richard Rahl learns to \"dance with death\" through his magical sword. This \"dance\" involves many aspects, including an increasingly deeper knowledge of the balance between life and death, taking the knowledge and experience of those who lived in times before and wielded the Sword of Truth.\n\nThe motif \"Death and the Maiden\", is related to, and may have been derived from, the Danse Macabre. It has received numerous treatments in various media—most prominently Schubert's quartet of that name. Further developments of the Danse Macabre motif include \"Death and the King's Horseman\", \"Death and the Senator\", \"Death and the Compass\", and \"Death and the Physician\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8885", "title": "David Abercromby", "text": "David Abercromby\n\nDavid Abercromby was a 17th-century Scottish physician and writer, thought to have died in 1702. Brought up at Douai as a Roman Catholic by Jesuit priests, he was converted to Protestantism in 1682 and came to abjure popery, and published \"Protestancy proved Safer than Popery\" (1686).\n\nHis medical reputation was based on his \"Tuta ac efficax luis venereae saepe absque mercurio ac semper absque salivatione mercuriali curando methodus\" (1684) which was translated into French, Dutch and German. Two other works by him were \"De Pulsus Variatione\" (1685), and \"Ars explorandi medicas facultates plantarum ex solo sapore\" (1688); his \"Opuscula\" were collected in 1687. These professional writings gave him a place and memorial in Albrecht von Haller, \"Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae\" (1779). According to Haller he was alive early in the 18th century.\n\nHe also wrote some books in theology and philosophy, controversial in their time but little remembered today. But the most noticeable of his productions is \"A Discourse of Wit\" (1685), which contains some of the most characteristic metaphysical opinions of the Scottish philosophy of common sense. It was followed by \"Academia Scientiarum\" (1687), and by \"A Moral Discourse of the Power of Interest\" (1690), dedicated to Robert Boyle, Abercromby's patron in the 1680s. He later wrote \"Reasons Why A Protestant Should not Turn Papist\" (1687), which has often wrongly been attributed to Boyle. \"A Short Account of Scots Divines\", by him, was printed at Edinburgh in 1833, edited by James Maidment.\n\n"}
{"id": "8886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8886", "title": "Deconstruction", "text": "Deconstruction\n\nDeconstruction is philosopher Jacques Derrida's critique of the relationship between text and meaning.\n\nDerrida's approach consists in conducting readings of texts with an ear to what runs counter to the structural unity or intended sense of a particular text. The purpose is to expose that the object of language and that which any text is founded upon is irreducibly complex, unstable, or impossible. Throughout his readings, Derrida hoped to show deconstruction at work, i.e., the ways that this originary complexity—which by definition cannot ever be completely known—works its structuring and destructuring effects.\n\nMany debates in continental philosophy surrounding ontology, epistemology, ethics, aesthetics, hermeneutics, and philosophy of language refer to Derrida's observations. Since the 80s, they inspired a range of theoretical entreprises in the humanities, including the disciplines of law anthropology, historiography, linguistics, sociolinguistics, psychoanalysis, LGBT studies, and the feminist school of thought. Deconstruction also inspired deconstructivism in architecture and remains important within art, music, and literary criticism. While part of common knowledge in Continental Europe (and where Continental Philosophy is mainstream), Deconstruction has yet to be adopted or accepted by most Philosophy departments in universities where Analytic Philosophy has the upper hand.\n\nJacques Derrida's 1967 work \"Of Grammatology\" introduced the majority of ideas influential within deconstruction. According to Derrida and taking inspiration from the work of Ferdinand de Saussure, language as a system of signs and words only has meaning because of the contrast between these signs. As Rorty contends, \"words have meaning only because of contrast-effects with other words...no word can acquire meaning in the way in which philosophers from Aristotle to Bertrand Russell have hoped it might—by being the unmediated expression of something non-linguistic (e.g., an emotion, a sense-datum, a physical object, an idea, a Platonic Form)\". As a consequence meaning is never present, but rather is deferred to other signs. Derrida refers to the — in this view, mistaken — belief that there is a self-sufficient, non-deferred meaning as metaphysics of presence. A concept then must be understood in the context of its opposite, such as being/nothingness, normal/abnormal, speech/writing, etc.\n\nFurther, Derrida contends that \"in a classical philosophical opposition we are not dealing with the peaceful coexistence of a vis-a-vis, but rather with a violent hierarchy. One of the two terms governs the other (axiologically, logically, etc.), or has the upper hand\": signified over signifier; intelligible over sensible; speech over writing; activity over passivity, etc. The first task of deconstruction would be to find and overturn these oppositions inside a text or a corpus of texts. But the final objective of deconstruction is not to surpass all oppositions, because it is assumed they are structurally necessary to produce sense. They simply cannot be suspended once and for all. The hierarchy of dual oppositions always reestablishes itself. Deconstruction only points to the necessity of an unending analysis that can make explicit the decisions and arbitrary violence intrinsic to all texts.\n\nFinally, Derrida argues that it is not enough to expose and deconstruct the way oppositions work and then stop there in a nihilistic or cynical position, \"thereby preventing any means of intervening in the field effectively\". To be effective, deconstruction needs to create new terms, not to synthesize the concepts in opposition, but to mark their difference and eternal interplay. This explains why Derrida always proposes new terms in his deconstruction, not as a free play but as a pure necessity of analysis, to better mark the intervals. Derrida called undecidables, that is, unities of simulacrum, \"false\" verbal properties (nominal or semantic) that can no longer be included within philosophical (binary) opposition: but which, however, inhabit philosophical oppositions, resisting and organizing it, without ever constituting a third term, without ever leaving room for a solution in the form of Hegelian dialectics (e.g. différance, archi-writing, pharmakon, supplement, hymen, gram, spacing).\n\nDerrida's original use of the word \"deconstruction\" was a translation of \"Destruktion\", a concept from the work of Martin Heidegger that Derrida sought to apply to textual reading. Heidegger's term referred to a process of exploring the categories and concepts that tradition has imposed on a word, and the history behind them.\n\nDerrida's concerns flow from a consideration of several issues:\n\n\nTo this end, Derrida follows a long line of modern philosophers, who look backwards to Plato and his influence on the Western metaphysical tradition. Like Nietzsche, Derrida suspects Plato of dissimulation in the service of a political project, namely the education, through critical reflections, of a class of citizens more strategically positioned to influence the polis. However, like Nietzsche, Derrida is not satisfied merely with such a political interpretation of Plato, because of the particular dilemma modern humans find themselves stuck in. His Platonic reflections are inseparably part of his critique of modernity, hence the attempt to be something beyond the modern, because of this Nietzschian sense that the modern has lost its way and become mired in nihilism.\n\nDifférance is the observation that the meanings of words come from their synchrony with other words within the language and their diachrony between contemporary and historical definitions of a word. Understanding language according to Derrida required an understanding of both viewpoints of linguistic analysis. The focus on diachrony has led to accusations against Derrida of engaging in the etymological fallacy.\n\nThere is one statement by Derrida which has been of great interest to his opponents, and which appeared in an essay on Rousseau (part of the highly influential \"Of Grammatology\", 1967), It is the assertion that \"there is no outside-text\" (\"il n'y a pas de hors-texte\"), which is often mistranslated as \"there is nothing outside of the text\". The mistranslation is often used to suggest Derrida believes that nothing exists but words. Michel Foucault, for instance, famously misattributed to Derrida the very different phrase \"Il n'y a rien en dehors du texte\" for this purpose. According to Derrida, his statement simply refers to the unavoidability of context that is at the heart of différance.\n\nFor example, the word \"house\" derives its meaning more as a function of how it differs from \"shed\", \"mansion\", \"hotel\", \"building\", etc. (Form of Content, that Louis Hjelmslev distinguished from Form of Expression) than how the word \"house\" may be tied to a certain image of a traditional house (i.e. the relationship between signified and signifier) with each term being established in reciprocal determination with the other terms than by an ostensive description or definition: when can we talk about a \"house\" or a \"mansion\" or a \"shed\"? The same can be said about verbs, in all the languages in the world: when should we stop saying \"walk\" and start saying \"run\"? The same happens, of course, with adjectives: when must we stop saying \"yellow\" and start saying \"orange\", or exchange \"past\" for \"present? Not only are the topological differences between the words relevant here, but the differentials between what is signified is also covered by différance.\n\nThus, complete meaning is always \"differential\" and \"postponed\" in language; there is never a moment when meaning is complete and total. A simple example would consist of looking up a given word in a dictionary, then proceeding to look up the words found in that word's definition, etc., also comparing with older dictionaries from different periods in time, and such a process would never end.\n\nDerrida describes the task of deconstruction as the identification of metaphysics of presence or \"logocentrism\" in western philosophy. Metaphysics of presence is the desire for immediate access to meaning, the privileging of presence over absence. This means that there is an assumed bias in certain binary oppositions where one side is placed in a position of one over another, such as good over bad, speech over the written word, male over female among other oppositions. Derrida writes, \"Without a doubt, Aristotle thinks of time on the basis of ousia as parousia, on the basis of the now, the point, etc. And yet an entire reading could be organized that would repeat in Aristotle's text both this limitation and its opposite\". To Derrida the central bias of logocentrism was the now being placed as more important than the future or past. This argument is largely based on the earlier work of Heidegger, who, in Being and Time, claimed that the theoretical attitude of pure presence is parasitical upon a more originary involvement with the world in concepts such as the ready-to-hand and being-with.\n\nIn the deconstruction procedure, one of the main concerns of Derrida is not to collapse into Hegel's dialectic where these oppositions would be reduced to contradictions in a dialectic that has the purpose of resolving it into a synthesis. The presence of Hegelian dialectics was enormous in the intellectual life of France during the second half of the 20th century with the influence of Kojève and Hyppolite, but also with the impact of dialectics based on contradiction developed by Marxists, and including the existentialism from Sartre, etc. This explains Derrida's concern to always distinguish his procedure from Hegel's, since Hegelianism believes binary oppositions would produce a synthesis, while Derrida saw binary oppositions as incapable of collapsing into a synthesis free from the original contradiction.\n\nDerrida's observations have had a large influence on literary criticism and post-structuralism.\n\nDerrida's method consisted in demonstrating all the forms and varieties of the originary complexity of semiotics, and their multiple consequences in many fields. His way of achieving this was by conducting thorough, careful, sensitive, and yet transformational readings of philosophical and literary texts, with an ear to what in those texts runs counter to their apparent systematicity (structural unity) or intended sense (authorial genesis). By demonstrating the aporias and ellipses of thought, Derrida hoped to show the infinitely subtle ways that this originary complexity, which by definition cannot ever be completely known, works its structuring and destructuring effects.\n\nDeconstruction denotes the pursuing of the meaning of a text to the point of exposing the supposed contradictions and internal oppositions upon which it is founded—supposedly showing that those foundations are irreducibly complex, unstable, or impossible. It is an approach that may be deployed in philosophy, in literary analysis, and even in the analysis of scientific writings. Deconstruction generally tries to demonstrate that any text is not a discrete whole but contains several irreconcilable and contradictory meanings; that any text therefore has more than one interpretation; that the text itself links these interpretations inextricably; that the incompatibility of these interpretations is irreducible; and thus that an interpretative reading cannot go beyond a certain point. Derrida refers to this point as an \"aporia\" in the text; thus, deconstructive reading is termed \"aporetic.\" He insists that meaning is made possible by the relations of a word to other words within the network of structures that language is.\n\nDerrida initially resisted granting to his approach the overarching name \"deconstruction,\" on the grounds that it was a precise technical term that could not be used to characterize his work generally. Nevertheless, he eventually accepted that the term had come into common use to refer to his textual approach, and Derrida himself increasingly began to use the term in this more general way.\n\nDerrida's lecture at Johns Hopkins University, \"Structure, Sign, and Play in the Human Sciences\", often appears in collections as a manifesto against structuralism. Derrida's essay was one of the earliest to propose some theoretical limitations to structuralism, and to attempt to theorize on terms that were clearly no longer structuralist. Structuralism viewed language as a number of signs, composed of a signified (the meaning) and a signifier (the word itself). Derrida proposed that signs always referred to other signs, existing only in relation to each other, and there was therefore no ultimate foundation or centre, this is the basis of différance.\n\nBetween the late 1960s and the early 1980s many thinkers were influenced by deconstruction, including Paul de Man, Geoffrey Hartman, and J. Hillis Miller. This group came to be known as the Yale school and was especially influential in literary criticism. Derrida and Hillis Miller were subsequently affiliated with the University of California, Irvine.\n\nMiller has described deconstruction this way: \"Deconstruction is not a dismantling of the structure of a text, but a demonstration that it has already dismantled itself. Its apparently solid ground is no rock, but thin air.\"\n\nArguing that law and politics cannot be separated, the founders of \"Critical Legal Studies Movement\" found necessary to criticize its absence at the level of theory. To demonstrate the indeterminacy of legal doctrine, these scholars often adopt a method, such as structuralism in linguistics or deconstruction in Continental philosophy, to make explicit the deep structure of categories and tensions at work in legal texts and talk. The aim was to deconstruct the tensions and procedures by which they are constructed, expressed, and deployed.\n\nFor example, Duncan Kennedy, in explicit reference to semiotics and deconstruction procedures, maintains that various legal doctrines are constructed around the binary pairs of opposed concepts, each of which has a claim upon intuitive and formal forms of reasoning that must be made explicit in their meaning and relative value, and criticized. Self and other, private and public, subjective and objective, freedom and control are examples of such pairs demonstrating the influence of opposing concepts on the development of legal doctrines through history.\n\nDeconstructive readings of history and sources have changed the entire discipline of history. In \"Deconstructing History\", Alun Munslow examines history in what he argues is a postmodern age. He provides an introduction to the debates and issues of postmodernist history. He also surveys the latest research into the relationship between the past, history, and historical practice, as well as forwarding his own challenging theories.\n\nJean-Luc Nancy argues in his 1982 book \"The Inoperative Community\" for an understanding of community and society that is undeconstructable because it is prior to conceptualisation. Nancy's work is an important development of deconstruction because it takes the challenge of deconstruction seriously and attempts to develop an understanding of political terms that is undeconstructable and therefore suitable for a philosophy after Derrida.\n\nSimon Critchley argues in his 1992 book (2nd edition: 1999; 3rd edition: 2014) \"The Ethics of Deconstruction\" that Derrida's deconstruction is an intrinsically ethical practice. Critchley argues that deconstruction involves an openness to the Other that makes it ethical in the Levinasian understanding of the term.\n\nJacques Derrida has had a huge influence on contemporary political theory and political philosophy. Derrida's thinking has inspired Slavoj Zizek, Richard Rorty, Ernesto Laclau, Judith Butler and many more contemporary theorists who have developed a deconstructive approach to politics. Because deconstruction examines the internal logic of any given text or discourse it has helped many authors to analyse the contradictions inherent in all schools of thought, and as such it has proved revolutionary in political analysis, particularly ideology critiques.\n\nRichard Beardsworth, developing on Critchley's \"Ethics of Deconstruction\", argues in his 1996 \"Derrida and the Political\" that deconstruction is an intrinsically political practice. He further argues that the future of deconstruction faces a choice (perhaps an undecidable choice) between a theological approach and a technological approach represented first of all by the work of Bernard Stiegler.\n\nThere have been problems defining deconstruction. Derrida claimed that all of his essays were attempts to define what deconstruction is, and that deconstruction is necessarily complicated and difficult to explain since it actively criticises the very language needed to explain it.\n\nDerrida has been more forthcoming with negative (apophatic) than positive descriptions of deconstruction. When asked by Toshihiko Izutsu some preliminary considerations on how to translate \"deconstruction\" in Japanese, in order to at least prevent going contrary to its actual meaning, Derrida therefore began his response by saying that such question amounts to \"what deconstruction is not, or rather \"ought\" not to be\".\n\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not an analysis, a critique, or a method in the traditional sense that philosophy understands these terms. In these negative descriptions of deconstruction Derrida is seeking to \"multiply the cautionary indicators and put aside all the traditional philosophical concepts.\" This does not mean that deconstruction has absolutely nothing in common with an analysis, a critique, or a method because while Derrida distances deconstruction from these terms, he reaffirms \"the necessity of returning to them, at least under erasure\". Derrida's necessity of returning to a term under erasure means that even though these terms are problematic we must use them until they can be effectively reformulated or replaced. The relevance of the tradition of negative theology to Derrida's preference for negative descriptions of deconstruction is the notion that a positive description of deconstruction would over-determine the idea of deconstruction and that this would be a mistake because it would close off the openness that Derrida wishes to preserve for deconstruction. This means that if Derrida were to positively define deconstruction as, for example, a critique then this would put the concept of critique for ever outside the possibility of deconstruction. Some new philosophy beyond deconstruction would then be required in order to surpass the notion of critique.\n\nDerrida states that \"Deconstruction is not a method, and cannot be transformed into one\". This is because deconstruction is not a mechanical operation. Derrida warns against considering deconstruction as a mechanical operation when he states that \"It is true that in certain circles (university or cultural, especially in the United States) the technical and methodological \"metaphor\" that seems necessarily attached to the very word \"deconstruction\" has been able to seduce or lead astray\". Commentator Richard Beardsworth explains that\n\nDerrida is careful to avoid this term [method] because it carries connotations of a procedural form of judgement. A thinker with a method has already decided \"how\" to proceed, is unable to give him or herself up to the matter of thought in hand, is a functionary of the criteria which structure his or her conceptual gestures. For Derrida [...] this is irresponsibility itself. Thus, to talk of a method in relation to deconstruction, especially regarding its ethico-political implications, would appear to go directly against the current of Derrida's philosophical adventure.\n\nBeardsworth here explains that it would be irresponsible to undertake a deconstruction with a complete set of rules that need only be applied as a method to the object of deconstruction because this understanding would reduce deconstruction to a thesis of the reader that the text is then made to fit. This would be an irresponsible act of reading because it becomes a prejudicial procedure that only finds what it sets out to find.\n\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not a critique in the Kantian sense. This is because Kant defines the term critique as the opposite of dogmatism. For Derrida it is not possible to escape the dogmatic baggage of the language we use in order to perform a pure critique in the Kantian sense. For Derrida language is dogmatic because it is inescapably metaphysical. Derrida argues that language is inescapably metaphysical because it is made up of signifiers that only refer to that which transcends them — the signified. In addition Derrida asks rhetorically \"Is not the idea of knowledge and of the acquisition of knowledge in itself metaphysical?\" By this Derrida means that all claims to know something necessarily involve an assertion of the metaphysical type that something \"is\" the case somewhere. For Derrida the concept of neutrality is suspect and dogmatism is therefore involved in everything to a certain degree. Deconstruction can challenge a particular dogmatism and hence desediment dogmatism in general, but it cannot escape all dogmatism all at once.\n\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not an analysis in the traditional sense. This is because the possibility of analysis is predicated on the possibility of breaking up the text being analysed into elemental component parts. Derrida argues that there are no self-sufficient units of meaning in a text. This is because individual words or sentences in a text can only be properly understood in terms of how they fit into the larger structure of the text and language itself. For more on Derrida's theory of meaning see the page on différance.\n\nDerrida states that his use of the word deconstruction first took place in a context in which \"structuralism was dominant\" and its use is related to this context. Derrida states that deconstruction is an \"antistructuralist gesture\"because \"Structures were to be undone, decomposed, desedimented\". At the same time for Derrida deconstruction is also a \"structuralist gesture\" because it is concerned with the structure of texts. So for Derrida deconstruction involves \"a certain attention to structures\" and tries to \"understand how an 'ensemble' was constituted\". As both a structuralist and an antistructuralist gesture deconstruction is tied up with what Derrida calls the \"structural problematic\". The structural problematic for Derrida is the tension between genesis, that which is \"in the essential mode of creation or movement\", and structure, \"systems, or complexes, or static configurations\". An example of genesis would be the sensory ideas from which knowledge is then derived in the empirical epistemology. An example of structure would be a binary opposition such as good and evil where the meaning of each element is established, at least partly, through its relationship to the other element.\n\nIt is for this reason that Derrida distances his use of the term deconstruction from post-structuralism, a term that would suggest philosophy could simply go beyond structuralism. Derrida states that \"the motif of deconstruction has been associated with \"post-structuralism\" but that this term was \"a word unknown in France until its \"return\" from the United States\". In his deconstruction of Husserl, Derrida actually argues \"for\" the contamination of pure origins by the structures of language and temporality and Manfred Frank has even referred to Derrida's work as \"Neostructuralism\".\n\nThe popularity of the term deconstruction combined with the technical difficulty of Derrida's primary material on deconstruction and his reluctance to elaborate his understanding of the term has meant that many secondary sources have attempted to give a more straightforward explanation than Derrida himself ever attempted. Secondary definitions are therefore an interpretation of deconstruction by the person offering them rather than a direct summary of Derrida's actual position.\n\n\nA survey of the secondary literature reveals a wide range of heterogeneous arguments. Particularly problematic are the attempts to give neat introductions to deconstruction by people trained in literary criticism who sometimes have little or no expertise in the relevant areas of philosophy that Derrida is working in relation to. These secondary works (e.g. \"Deconstruction for Beginners\"<ref name=\"powell/lee\">Powell, James and Lee, Joe, \"Deconstruction for Beginners\" (Writers & Readers Publishing, 2005)</ref> and \"Deconstructions: A User's Guide\") have attempted to explain deconstruction while being academically criticized as too far removed from the original texts and Derrida's actual position. In an effort to clarify the rather muddled reception of the term deconstruction Derrida specifies what deconstruction \"is not\" through a number of negative definitions.\n\nDerrida's theories on deconstruction were themselves influenced by the work of linguists such as Ferdinand de Saussure (whose writings on semiotics also became a cornerstone of structuralist theory in the mid-20th century) and literary theorists such as Roland Barthes (whose works were an investigation of the logical ends of structuralist thought). Derrida's views on deconstruction stood opposed to the theories of structuralists such as psychoanalytic theorist Jacques Lacan, and linguist Claude Lévi-Strauss. However, Derrida resisted attempts to label his work as \"post-structuralist\".\n\nIn order to understand Derrida's motivation, one must refer to Nietzsche's philosophy.\n\nNietzsche's project began with Orpheus, the man underground. This foil to Platonic light was deliberately and self-consciously lauded in \"Daybreak\", when Nietzsche announces, albeit retrospectively, \"In this work you will discover a subterranean man at work\", and then goes on to map the project of unreason: \"All things that live long are gradually so saturated with reason that their origin in unreason thereby becomes improbable. Does not almost every precise history of an origination impress our feelings as paradoxical and wantonly offensive? Does the good historian not, at bottom, constantly contradict?\"\n\nNietzsche's point in \"Daybreak\" is that standing at the end of modern history, modern thinkers know too much to be deceived by the illusion of reason any more. Reason, logic, philosophy and science are no longer solely sufficient as the royal roads to truth. And so Nietzsche decides to throw it in our faces, and uncover the truth of Plato, that he—unlike Orpheus—just happened to discover his true love in the light instead of in the dark. This being merely one historical event amongst many, Nietzsche proposes that we revisualize the history of the west as the history of a series of political moves, that is, a manifestation of the will to power, that at bottom have no greater or lesser claim to truth in any noumenal (absolute) sense. By calling our attention to the fact that he has assumed the role of Orpheus, the man underground, in dialectical opposition to Plato, Nietzsche hopes to sensitize us to the political and cultural context, and the political influences that impact authorship. For example, the political influences that led one author to choose philosophy over poetry (or at least \"portray\" himself as having made such a choice), and another to make a different choice.\n\nThe problem with Nietzsche, as Derrida sees it, is that he did not go far enough. That he missed the fact that this will to power is itself but a manifestation of the operation of writing. And so Derrida wishes to help us step beyond Nietzsche's penultimate revaluation of all western values, to the ultimate, which is the final appreciation of \"the role of writing in the production of knowledge\".\n\nDerrida approaches all texts as constructed around elemental oppositions which all discourse has to articulate if it intends to make any sense whatsoever. This is so because identity is viewed in non-essentialist terms as a construct, and because constructs only produce meaning through the interplay of difference inside a \"system of distinct signs\". This approach to text is influenced by the semiology of Ferdinand de Saussure.\n\nSaussure is considered one of the fathers of structuralism when he explained that terms get their meaning in reciprocal determination with other terms inside language:\n\nIn language there are only differences. Even more important: a difference generally implies positive terms between which the difference is set up; but in language there are only differences without positive terms. Whether we take the signified or the signifier, language has neither ideas nor sounds that existed before the linguistic system, but only conceptual and phonic differences that have issued from the system. The idea or phonic substance that a sign contains is of less importance than the other signs that surround it. [...] A linguistic system is a series of differences of sound combined with a series of differences of ideas; but the pairing of a certain number of acoustical signs with as many cuts made from the mass thought engenders a system of values.\n\nSaussure explicitly suggested that linguistics was only a branch of a more general semiology, of a science of signs in general, being human codes only one among others. Nevertheless, in the end, as Derrida pointed out, he made of linguistics \"the regulatory model\", and \"for essential, and essentially metaphysical, reasons had to privilege speech, and everything that links the sign to phone\". Derrida will prefer to follow the more \"fruitful paths (formalization)\" of a general semiotics without falling in what he considered \"a hierarchizing teleology\" privileging linguistics, and speak of 'mark' rather than of language, not as something restricted to mankind, but as prelinguistic, as the pure possibility of language, working every where there is a relation to something else.\n\nDerrida has been involved in a number of high-profile disagreements with prominent philosophers including Michel Foucault, John Searle, Willard Van Orman Quine, Peter Kreeft, and Jürgen Habermas. Most of the criticism of deconstruction were first articulated by these philosophers and repeated elsewhere.\n\nIn the early 1970s, Searle had a brief exchange with Jacques Derrida regarding speech-act theory. The exchange was characterized by a degree of mutual hostility between the philosophers, each of whom accused the other of having misunderstood his basic points. Searle was particularly hostile to Derrida's deconstructionist framework and much later refused to let his response to Derrida be printed along with Derrida's papers in the 1988 collection \"Limited Inc\". Searle did not consider Derrida's approach to be legitimate philosophy or even intelligible writing and argued that he did not want to legitimize the deconstructionist point of view by dedicating any attention to it. Consequently, some critics have considered the exchange to be a series of elaborate misunderstandings rather than a debate, while others have seen either Derrida or Searle gaining the upper hand. The level of hostility can be seen from Searle's statement that \"It would be a mistake to regard Derrida's discussion of Austin as a confrontation between two prominent philosophical traditions\", to which Derrida replied that that sentence was \"the only sentence of the \"reply\" to which I can subscribe\". Commentators have frequently interpreted the exchange as a prominent example of a confrontation between analytical and continental philosophy.\n\nThe debate began in 1972, when, in his paper \"Signature Event Context\", Derrida analyzed J. L. Austin's theory of the illocutionary act. While sympathetic to Austin's departure from a purely denotational account of language to one that includes \"force\", Derrida was sceptical of the framework of normativity employed by Austin. He argued that Austin had missed the fact that any speech event is framed by a \"structure of absence\" (the words that are left unsaid due to contextual constraints) and by \"iterability\" (the constraints on what can be said, given by what has been said in the past). Derrida argued that the focus on intentionality in speech-act theory was misguided because intentionality is restricted to that which is already established as a possible intention. He also took issue with the way Austin had excluded the study of fiction, non-serious or \"parasitic\" speech, wondering whether this exclusion was because Austin had considered these speech genres governed by different structures of meaning, or simply due to a lack of interest. In his brief reply to Derrida, \"Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida\", Searle argued that Derrida's critique was unwarranted because it assumed that Austin's theory attempted to give a full account of language and meaning when its aim was much narrower. Searle considered the omission of parasitic discourse forms to be justified by the narrow scope of Austin's inquiry. Searle agreed with Derrida's proposal that intentionality presupposes iterability, but did not apply the same concept of intentionality used by Derrida, being unable or unwilling to engage with the continental conceptual apparatus. This, in turn, caused Derrida to criticize Searle for not being sufficiently familiar with phenomenological perspectives on intentionality. Searle also argued that Derrida's disagreement with Austin turned on his having misunderstood Austin's type–token distinction and his failure to understand Austin's concept of failure in relation to performativity. Some critics have suggested that Searle, by being so grounded in the analytical tradition that he was unable to engage with Derrida's continental phenomenological tradition, was at fault for the unsuccessful nature of the exchange.\n\nDerrida, in his response to Searle ( in \"Limited Inc\"), ridiculed Searle's positions. Claiming that a clear sender of Searle's message could not be established, he suggested that Searle had formed with Austin a \"société à responsabilité limitée\" (a \"limited liability company\") due to the ways in which the ambiguities of authorship within Searle's reply circumvented the very speech act of his reply. Searle did not reply. Later in 1988, Derrida tried to review his position and his critiques of Austin and Searle, reiterating that he found the constant appeal to \"normality\" in the analytical tradition to be problematic.\n\nIn the debate, Derrida praises Austin's work, but argues that he is wrong to banish what Austin calls \"infelicities\" from the \"normal\" operation of language. One \"infelicity,\" for instance, occurs when it cannot be known whether a given speech act is \"sincere\" or \"merely citational\" (and therefore possibly ironic, etc.). Derrida argues that every iteration is necessarily \"citational\", due to the graphematic nature of speech and writing, and that language could not work at all without the ever-present and ineradicable possibility of such alternate readings. Derrida takes Searle to task for his attempt to get around this issue by grounding final authority in the speaker's inaccessible \"intention\". Derrida argues that intention cannot possibly govern how an iteration signifies, once it becomes hearable or readable. All speech acts borrow a language whose significance is determined by historical-linguistic context, and by the alternate possibilities that this context makes possible. This significance, Derrida argues, cannot be altered or governed by the whims of intention.\n\nHe would also argue about the problem he found in the constant appeal to \"normality\" in the analytical tradition from which Austin and Searle were only paradigmatic examples.\n\nHe continued arguing how problematic was establishing the relation between \"nonfiction or standard discourse\" and \"fiction,\" defined as its \"parasite, \"for part of the most originary essence of the latter is to allow fiction, the simulacrum, parasitism, to take place-and in so doing to \"de-essentialize\" itself as it were\".\nHe would finally argue that the indispensable question would then become:\nIn 1995, Searle gave a brief reply to Derrida in \"The Construction of Social Reality\". He called Derrida's conclusion \"preposterous\" and stated that \"Derrida, as far as I can tell, does not have an argument. He simply declares that there is nothing outside of texts...\" Searle's reference here is not to anything forwarded in the debate, but to a mistranslation of the phrase \"\"il n'y a pas dehors du texte\",\" (\"There is no outside-text\") which appears in Derrida's \"Of Grammatology\".\n\nIn \"The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity\", Jürgen Habermas criticized what he considered Derrida's opposition to rational discourse.\n\nFurther, in an essay on religion and religious language, Habermas criticized Derrida's insistence on etymology and philology (see \"Etymological fallacy\").\n\nThe American philosopher Walter A. Davis, in \"Inwardness and Existence: Subjectivity in/and Hegel, Heidegger, Marx and Freud\", argues that both deconstruction and structuralism are prematurely arrested moments of a dialectical movement that issues in Hegelian \"unhappy consciousness\".\n\nPopular criticism of deconstruction also intensified following the Sokal affair, which many people took as an indicator of the quality of deconstruction as a whole, despite the absence of Derrida from Sokal's follow-up book \"Impostures Intellectuelles\".\n\nChip Morningstar holds a view critical of deconstruction, believing it to be \"epistemologically challenged\". He claims the humanities are subject to isolation and genetic drift due to their unaccountability to the world outside academia. During the Second International Conference on Cyberspace (Santa Cruz, California, 1991), he reportedly heckled deconstructionists off the stage. He subsequently presented his views in the article \"\"How to Deconstruct Almost Anything\"\". and states\"Contrary to the report given in the “Hype List” column of issue #1 of Wired (“Po-Mo Gets Tek-No”, page 87), we did not shout down the postmodernists. We made fun of them.\" ibid.\n\nDerrida published a number of works directly relevant to the concept of deconstruction, \"Of Grammatology\" was the book that introduced the idea of Deconstruction. Derrida went on to write many other books showing deconstruction in action or defining it more completely. Those other books include \"Différance\", \"Speech and Phenomena\", and \"Writing and Difference\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8887", "title": "Direct product", "text": "Direct product\n\nIn mathematics, one can often define a direct product of objects already known, giving a new one. This generalizes the Cartesian product of the underlying sets, together with a suitably defined structure on the product set. More abstractly, one talks about the product in category theory, which formalizes these notions.\n\nExamples are the product of sets (see Cartesian product), groups (described below), the product of rings and of other algebraic structures. The product of topological spaces is another instance.\n\nThere is also the direct sum – in some areas this is used interchangeably, in others it is a different concept.\n\n\nIn a similar manner, we can talk about the product of more than two objects, e.g. formula_18. We can even talk about product of infinitely many objects, e.g. formula_19.\n\nIn group theory one can define the direct product of two groups (\"G\", ∘) and (\"H\", ∙), denoted by \"G\" × \"H\". For abelian groups which are written additively, it may also be called the direct sum of two groups, denoted by formula_20.\n\nIt is defined as follows:\n(Note (\"G\", ∘) may be the same as (\"H\", ∙).)\n\nThis construction gives a new group. It has a normal subgroup isomorphic to \"G\" (given by the elements of the form (\"g\", 1)), and one isomorphic to \"H\" (comprising the elements (1, \"h\")).\n\nThe reverse also holds, there is the following recognition theorem: If a group \"K\" contains two normal subgroups \"G\" and \"H\", such that \"K\"= \"GH\" and the intersection of \"G\" and \"H\" contains only the identity, then \"K\" is isomorphic to \"G\" × \"H\". A relaxation of these conditions, requiring only one subgroup to be normal, gives the semidirect product.\n\nAs an example, take as \"G\" and \"H\" two copies of the unique (up to isomorphisms) group of order 2, \"C\": say {1, \"a\"} and {1, \"b\"}. Then \"C\"×\"C\" = {(1,1), (1,\"b\"), (\"a\",1), (\"a\",\"b\")}, with the operation element by element. For instance, (1,\"b\")*(\"a\",1) = (1*\"a\", \"b\"*1) = (\"a\",\"b\"), and (1,\"b\")*(1,\"b\") = (1,\"b\") = (1,1).\n\nWith a direct product, we get some natural group homomorphisms for free: the projection maps \ncalled the coordinate functions.\n\nAlso, every homomorphism \"f\" to the direct product is totally determined by its component functions \nformula_22.\n\nFor any group (\"G\", ∘), and any integer \"n\" ≥ 0, multiple application of the direct product gives the group of all \"n\"-tuples \"G\" (for \"n\" = 0 the trivial group). Examples:\n\nThe direct product for modules (not to be confused with the tensor product) is very similar to the one defined for groups above, using the Cartesian product with the operation of addition being componentwise, and the scalar multiplication just distributing over all the components. Starting from R we get Euclidean space R, the prototypical example of a real \"n\"-dimensional vector space. The direct product of R and R is R.\n\nNote that a direct product for a finite index formula_23 is identical to the direct sum formula_24. The direct sum and direct product differ only for infinite indices, where the elements of a direct sum are zero for all but for a finite number of entries. They are dual in the sense of category theory: the direct sum is the coproduct, while the direct product is the product.\n\nFor example, consider formula_25 and formula_26, the infinite direct product and direct sum of the real numbers. Only sequences with a finite number of non-zero elements are in \"Y\". For example, (1,0,0,0...) is in \"Y\" but (1,1,1,1...) is not. Both of these sequences are in the direct product \"X\"; in fact, \"Y\" is a proper subset of \"X\" (that is, \"Y\" ⊂ \"X\").\n\nThe direct product for a collection of topological spaces \"X\" for \"i\" in \"I\", some index set, once again makes use of the Cartesian product\n\nDefining the topology is a little tricky. For finitely many factors, this is the obvious and natural thing to do: simply take as a basis of open sets to be the collection of all Cartesian products of open subsets from each factor:\n\nThis topology is called the product topology. For example, directly defining the product topology on R by the open sets of R (disjoint unions of open intervals), the basis for this topology would consist of all disjoint unions of open rectangles in the plane (as it turns out, it coincides with the usual metric topology).\n\nThe product topology for infinite products has a twist, and this has to do with being able to make all the projection maps continuous and to make all functions into the product continuous if and only if all its component functions are continuous (i.e. to satisfy the categorical definition of product: the morphisms here are continuous functions): we take as a basis of open sets to be the collection of all Cartesian products of open subsets from each factor, as before, with the proviso that all but finitely many of the open subsets are the entire factor:\n\nThe more natural-sounding topology would be, in this case, to take products of infinitely many open subsets as before, and this does yield a somewhat interesting topology, the box topology. However it is not too difficult to find an example of bunch of continuous component functions whose product function is not continuous (see the separate entry box topology for an example and more). The problem which makes the twist necessary is ultimately rooted in the fact that the intersection of open sets is only guaranteed to be open for finitely many sets in the definition of topology.\n\nProducts (with the product topology) are nice with respect to preserving properties of their factors; for example, the product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff; the product of connected spaces is connected, and the product of compact spaces is compact. That last one, called Tychonoff's theorem, is yet another equivalence to the axiom of choice.\n\nFor more properties and equivalent formulations, see the separate entry product topology.\n\nOn the Cartesian product of two sets with binary relations \"R\" and \"S\", define (\"a\", \"b\") T (\"c\", \"d\") as \"a\" \"R\" \"c\" and \"b\" \"S\" \"d\". If \"R\" and \"S\" are both reflexive, irreflexive, transitive, symmetric, or antisymmetric, relation \"T\" has the same property. Combining properties it follows that this also applies for being a preorder and being an equivalence relation. However, if \"R\" and \"S\" are total relations, \"T\" is in general not.\n\nIf Σ is a fixed signature, \"I\" is an arbitrary (possibly infinite) index set, and (A) is an indexed family of Σ algebras, the direct product A = ∏ A is a Σ algebra defined as follows:\nFor each , the \"i\"th projection is defined by . It is a surjective homomorphism between the Σ algebras A and A.\n\nAs a special case, if the index set the direct product of two Σ algebras A and A is obtained, written as . If Σ just contains one binary operation \"f\", the above definition of the direct product of groups is obtained, using the notation , , , , and . Similarly, the definition of the direct product of modules is subsumed here.\n\nThe direct product can be abstracted to an arbitrary category. In a general category, given a collection of objects \"A\" \"and\" a collection of morphisms \"p\" from \"A\" to \"A\" with \"i\" ranging in some index set \"I\", an object \"A\" is said to be a categorical product in the category if, for any object \"B\" and any collection of morphisms \"f\" from \"B\" to \"A\", there exists a unique morphism \"f\" from \"B\" to \"A\" such that \"f = p f\" and this object \"A\" is unique. This not only works for two factors, but arbitrarily (even infinitely) many.\n\nFor groups we similarly define the direct product of a more general, arbitrary collection of groups \"G\" for \"i\" in \"I\", \"I\" an index set. Denoting the Cartesian product of the groups by \"G\" we define multiplication on \"G\" with the operation of componentwise multiplication; and corresponding to the \"p\" in the definition above are the projection maps\n\nthe functions that take formula_31 to its \"i\"th component \"g\".\n\nSome authors draw a distinction between an internal direct product and an external direct product. If formula_32 and formula_33, then we say that \"X\" is an \"internal\" direct product (of \"A\" and \"B\"); if \"A\" and \"B\" are not subobjects, then we say that this is an \"external\" direct product.\n\nA metric on a Cartesian product of metric spaces, and a norm on a direct product of normed vector spaces, can be defined in various ways, see for example p-norm.\n\n"}
{"id": "8888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8888", "title": "Déjà vu", "text": "Déjà vu\n\nDéjà vu (; ) from French, literally \"already seen\", is the phenomenon of having the feeling that the situation currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past.\nDéjà vu is a feeling of familiarity, and déjà vécu (the feeling of having \"already lived through\" something) is a feeling of recollection.\nScientific approaches reject the explanation of déjà vu as \"precognition\" or \"prophecy\", but rather explain it as an anomaly of memory, which creates a distinct impression that an experience is \"being recalled\". This explanation is supported by the fact that the sense of \"recollection\" at the time is strong in most cases, but the circumstances of the \"previous\" experience (when, where, and how the earlier experience occurred) are uncertain or believed to be impossible. Two types of déjà vu are suggested to exist: the pathological type of déjà vu usually associated with epilepsy and the non-pathological which is a characteristic of healthy people and psychological phenomena.\n\nA 2004 review claimed that approximately two-thirds of the population have had déjà vu experiences. Other studies confirm that déjà vu is a common experience in healthy individuals, with between 31% and 96% of individuals reporting it. Déjà vu experiences that are unusually prolonged or frequent, or in association with other symptoms such as hallucinations, may be an indicator of neurological or psychiatric illness.\n\nEarly researchers tried to establish a link between déjà vu and mental disorders such as anxiety, dissociative identity disorder and schizophrenia but failed to find correlations of any diagnostic value. There does not seem to be a special association between déjà vu and schizophrenia.\n\nThe strongest pathological association of déjà vu is with temporal lobe epilepsy. This correlation has led some researchers to speculate that the experience of déjà vu is possibly a neurological anomaly related to improper electrical discharge in the brain, creating a strong sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. As most people suffer a mild (i.e. non-pathological) epileptic episode regularly (e.g. a hypnagogic jerk, the sudden \"jolt\" that frequently, but not always, occurs just prior to falling asleep), it is conjectured that a similar (mild) neurological aberration occurs in the experience of déjà vu, resulting in an erroneous sensation of memory. Scientists have even looked into genetics when considering déjà vu. Although there is not currently a gene associated with déjà vu, the LGII gene on chromosome 10 is being studied for a possible link. Certain forms of the gene are associated with a mild form of epilepsy and, though by no means a certainty, déjà vu, along with jamais vu, occurs often enough during seizures (such as simple partial seizures) that researchers have reason to suspect a link.\n\nA 2008 study found that déjà vu experiences are unlikely to be pathological dissociative experiences.\n\nCertain drugs increase the chances of déjà vu occurring in the user, resulting in a strong sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. Some pharmaceutical drugs, when taken together, have also been implicated in the cause of déjà vu. Taiminen and Jääskeläinen (2001) reported the case of an otherwise healthy male who started experiencing intense and recurrent sensations of déjà vu upon taking the drugs amantadine and phenylpropanolamine together to relieve flu symptoms. He found the experience so interesting that he completed the full course of his treatment and reported it to the psychologists to write up as a case study. Because of the dopaminergic action of the drugs and previous findings from electrode stimulation of the brain (e.g. Bancaud, Brunet-Bourgin, Chauvel, & Halgren, 1994), Taiminen and Jääskeläinen speculate that déjà vu occurs as a result of hyperdopaminergic action in the mesial temporal areas of the brain.\n\nResearch has associated déjà vu experiences with good memory functions.\n\nThe similarity between a déjà-vu-eliciting stimulus and an existing, or non-existing but different, memory trace may lead to the sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. Thus, encountering something that evokes the implicit associations of an experience or sensation that cannot be remembered may lead to déjà vu. In an effort to reproduce the sensation experimentally, Banister and Zangwill (1941) used hypnosis to give participants posthypnotic amnesia for material they had already seen. When this was later re-encountered, the restricted activation caused thereafter by the posthypnotic amnesia resulted in 3 of the 10 participants reporting what the authors termed \"paramnesias\".\n\nMemory-based explanations may lead to the development of a number of non-invasive experimental methods by which a long sought-after analogue of déjà vu can be reliably produced that would allow it to be tested under well-controlled experimental conditions. Cleary suggests that déjà vu may be a form of familiarity-based recognition (recognition that is based on a feeling that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past) and that laboratory methods of probing familiarity-based recognition hold promise for probing déjà vu in laboratory settings.\n\nA 2012 study that used virtual reality technology to study reported déjà vu experiences supported this idea. This virtual reality investigation suggested that similarity between a new scene's spatial layout and the layout of a previously experienced scene in memory (but which fails to be recalled) may contribute to the déjà vu experience. When the previously experienced scene fails to come to mind in response to viewing the new scene, that previously experienced scene in memory can still exert an effect—that effect may be a feeling of familiarity with the new scene that is subjectively experienced as a feeling that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past, or of having been there before despite knowing otherwise.\n\nAnother possible explanation for the phenomenon of déjà vu is the occurrence of \"cryptomnesia\", which is where information learned is forgotten but nevertheless stored in the brain, and similar occurrences invoke the contained knowledge, leading to a feeling of familiarity because the event or experience being experienced has already been experienced in the past, known as \"déjà vu\". Some experts suggest that memory is a process of reconstruction, rather than a recall of fixed, established events. This reconstruction comes from stored components, involving elaborations, distortions, and omissions. Each successive recall of an event is merely a recall of the last reconstruction. The proposed sense of recognition (déjà vu) involves achieving a good \"match\" between the present experience and our stored data. This reconstruction, however, may now differ so much from the original event that we \"know\" we have never experienced it before, even though it seems similar.\n\nIn 1963, Robert Efron of Boston's Veterans Hospital proposed that déjà vu is caused by dual neurological processing caused by delayed signals. Efron found that the brain's sorting of incoming signals is done in the temporal lobe of the brain's left hemisphere. However, signals enter the temporal lobe \"twice\" before processing, once from each hemisphere of the brain, normally with a slight delay of milliseconds between them. Efron proposed that if the two signals were occasionally not synchronized properly, then they would be processed as two separate experiences, with the second seeming to be a re-living of the first.\n\nOne theory of déjà vu attributes the feeling of having previously seen or experienced something that is currently being seen or experienced to that of having dreamt about a similar situation or place and then forgetting about it until one seems to be mysteriously reminded of the situation or the place while awake. The spontaneity of these types of déjà vu \"moments\" can catch any person off-guard, especially when they get the sensation from visiting a specific place they have never been to before, to the point where they are in a temporary state of shock and disbelief.\n\nJamais vu (from French, meaning \"never seen\") is a term in psychology which is used to describe any familiar situation which is not recognized by the observer.\n\nOften described as the opposite of déjà vu, jamais vu involves a sense of eeriness and the observer's impression of seeing the situation for the first time, despite rationally knowing that he or she has been in the situation before. Jamais vu is more commonly explained as when a person momentarily does not recognize a word, person, or place that they already know. Jamais vu is sometimes associated with certain types of aphasia, amnesia, and epilepsy.\n\nTheoretically, a jamais vu feeling in a sufferer of a delirious disorder or intoxication could result in a delirious explanation of it, such as in the Capgras delusion, in which the patient takes a known person for a false double or impostor. If the impostor is himself, the clinical setting would be the same as the one described as depersonalisation, hence jamais vus of oneself or of the very \"reality of reality\", are termed depersonalisation (or surreality) feelings.\n\nThe feeling has been evoked through semantic satiation. Chris Moulin of the University of Leeds asked 95 volunteers to write the word \"door\" 30 times in 60 seconds. 68 percent of the subjects reported symptoms of jamais vu, with some beginning to doubt that \"door\" was a real word.\n\nThe experience has also been named \"vuja de\" and \"véjà du\".\n\nPresque vu (, from French, meaning \"almost seen\") is the intense feeling of being on the very brink of a powerful epiphany, insight, or revelation, without actually achieving the revelation. The feeling is often therefore associated with a frustrating, tantalizing sense of incompleteness or near-completeness.\n\nDéjà entendu, (literally \"already heard\") is the experience of feeling sure about having already heard something, even though the exact details are uncertain or were perhaps imagined.\n\nDéjà vécu is a memory mis-attribution where one feels they have been through an experience and even remember details of what happened.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8892", "title": "Dionysius Thrax", "text": "Dionysius Thrax\n\nDionysius Thrax (, , Contemporary Koine: ; 170–90 BC) was a Hellenistic grammarian and a pupil of Aristarchus of Samothrace. His place of origin was not Thrace as the epithet \"Thrax\" denotes, but probably Alexandria (his father's descent was Thracian). He lived and worked in this city but later taught at Rhodes.\n\nThe first extant grammar of Greek, \"Art of Grammar\" ( \"Tékhnē grammatiké\") is attributed to him but many scholars today doubt that the work really belongs solely to him due to the difference between the technical approach of most of the work and the more literary approach (similar to the 2nd century's Alexandrian tradition) of the first few sections. It concerns itself primarily with a morphological description of Greek, lacking any treatment of syntax. The work was translated into Armenian and Syriac in the early Christian era.\n\nThrax defines grammar at the beginning of the \"Tékhnē\" as \"the practical knowledge of the general usages of poets and prose writers.\" Thus Dionysius Thrax, like contemporary Alexandrian scholars who edited Attic Greek and Homeric texts, was concerned with facilitating the teaching of classic Greek literature to an audience who spoke Koine Greek.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8893", "title": "December 29", "text": "December 29\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8895", "title": "Despina", "text": "Despina\n\nDespina is a given name for girls, meaning 'lady' in Greek. Most of the time it refers to the Virgin Mary, Our Lady. The masculine of Despina is Despot or the equivalent of ruler or king. Very common among Greek people, it may refer to:\n\n\nIt may also refer to:\n"}
{"id": "8900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8900", "title": "Discrimination", "text": "Discrimination\n\nIn human social affairs, discrimination is treatment or consideration of, or making a distinction in favor of or against, a person based on the group, class, or category to which the person is perceived to belong rather than on individual attributes. This includes treatment of an individual or group, based on their actual or perceived membership in a certain group or social category, \"in a way that is worse than the way people are usually treated\". It involves the group's initial reaction or interaction going on to influence the individual's actual behavior towards the group leader or the group, restricting members of one group from opportunities or privileges that are available to another group, leading to the exclusion of the individual or entities based on logical or irrational decision making.\n\nDiscriminatory traditions, policies, ideas, practices, and laws exist in many countries and institutions in every part of the world, even in ones where discrimination is generally looked down upon. In some places, controversial attempts such as quotas have been used to benefit those believed to be current or past victims of discrimination—but have sometimes been called reverse discrimination. In the US, a government policy known as affirmative action was instituted to encourage employers and universities to seek out and accept groups such as African Americans and women, who have been subject to discrimination for a long time.\n\nThe term \"discriminate\" appeared in the early 17th century in the English language. It is from the Latin \"discriminat-\" 'distinguished between', from the verb \"discriminare\", from \"discrimen\" 'distinction', from the verb \"discernere\". Since the American Civil War the term \"discrimination\" generally evolved in American English usage as an understanding of prejudicial treatment of an individual based solely on their race, later generalized as membership in a certain socially undesirable group or social category. \"Discrimination\" derives from Latin, where the verb \"discrimire\" means \"to separate, to distinguish, to make a distinction\".\n\nMoral philosophers have defined discrimination as \"disadvantageous\" treatment or consideration. This is a comparative definition. An individual need not be actually harmed in order to be discriminated against. They just need to be treated \"worse\" than others for some arbitrary reason. If someone decides to donate to help orphan children, but decides to donate less, say, to black children out of a racist attitude, then they would be acting in a discriminatory way despite the fact that the people they discriminate against actually benefit by receiving a donation. In addition to this discrimination develops into a source of oppression. It is similar to the action of recognizing someone as 'different' so much that they are treated inhumanly and degraded.\n\nBased on realistic-conflict theory and social-identity theory, Rubin and Hewstone have highlighted a distinction among three types of discrimination:\n\nThe United Nations stance on discrimination includes the statement: \"Discriminatory behaviors take many forms, but they all involve some form of exclusion or rejection.\" International bodies United Nations Human Rights Council work towards helping ending discrimination around the world.\n\nImportant UN documents addressing discrimination include:\n\n\nAgeism or age discrimination is discrimination and stereotyping based on the grounds of someone's age. It is a set of beliefs, norms, and values which used to justify discrimination or subordination based on a person's age. Ageism is most often directed towards old people, or adolescents and children.\n\nAge discrimination in hiring has been shown to exist in the United States. Joanna Lahey, professor at The Bush School of Government and Public Service at Texas A&M, found that firms are more than 40% more likely to interview a young adult job applicant than an older job applicant. In Europe, Stijn Baert, Jennifer Norga, Yannick Thuy and Marieke Van Hecke, researchers at Ghent University, measured comparable ratio's in Belgium. Interestingly, they found that age discrimination is heterogeneous by the activity older candidates undertook during their additional post-educational years. In Belgium, they are only discriminated if they have more years of inactivity or irrelevant employment.\n\nIn a survey for the University of Kent, England, 29% of respondents stated that they had suffered from age discrimination. This is a higher proportion than for gender or racial discrimination. Dominic Abrams, social psychology professor at the university, concluded that ageism is the most pervasive form of prejudice experienced in the UK population.\n\nAccording to UNICEF and Human Rights Watch, caste discrimination affects an estimated 250 million people worldwide. Discrimination based on caste, as perceived by UNICEF, is prevalent mainly in parts of Asia, (India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, China, Pakistan, Nepal, Japan), Africa and others. , there were 200 million Dalits or Scheduled Castes (formerly known as \"untouchables\") in India.\n\nDiscrimination against people with disabilities in favor of people who are not is called ableism or disablism. Disability discrimination, which treats non-disabled individuals as the standard of ‘normal living’, results in public and private places and services, education, and social work that are built to serve 'standard' people, thereby excluding those with various disabilities. Studies have shown, employment is needed to not only provide a living but to sustain mental health and well-being. Work fulfils a number of basic needs for an individual such as collective purpose, social contact, status, and activity. A person with a disability is often found to be socially isolated and work is one way to reduce isolation.\n\nIn the United States, the Americans with Disabilities Act mandates the provision of equality of access to both buildings and services and is paralleled by similar acts in other countries, such as the Equality Act 2010 in the UK.\n\nDenying someone employment, or disallowing one from applying for a job, is often recognized as employment discrimination when the grounds for such an exclusion is not related to the requirements of the position, and protected characteristics may include age, disability, ethnicity, gender, gender identity, height, nationality, political affiliation, religion, sexual orientation, skin color, and weight.\n\nThe United States federal laws that protect against:\n\nMost other western nations have similar laws protecting these groups.\n\nStill unrelated to the requirements of the position, only 9% of Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) are women while they are over 60% among accountants and auditors. According to a 2013 report, those who reach a high responsibility position are paid on average 16% lower than their male colleagues.\n\nDiversity of language is protected and respected by most nations who value cultural diversity. However, people are sometimes subjected to different treatment because their preferred language is associated with a particular group, class or category. Notable examples are the Anti-French sentiment in the United States as well as the Anti-Quebec sentiment in Canada targeting people who speak the French language. Commonly, the preferred language is just another attribute of separate ethnic groups. Discrimination exists if there is prejudicial treatment against a person or a group of people who speak a particular language or dialect.\n\nLanguage discrimination is suggested to be labeled linguicism or logocism. Anti-discriminatory and inclusive efforts to accommodate persons who speak different languages or cannot have fluency in the country's predominant or \"official\" language, is bilingualism such as official documents in two languages, and multiculturalism in more than two languages.\n\nDiscrimination on the basis of nationality is usually included in employment laws (see above section for employment discrimination specifically). It is sometimes referred to as bound together with racial discrimination although it can be separate. It may vary from laws that stop refusals of hiring based on nationality, asking questions regarding origin, to prohibitions of firing, forced retirement, compensation and pay, etc., based on nationality.\n\nDiscrimination on the basis of nationality may show as a \"level of acceptance\" in a sport or work team regarding new team members and employees who differ from the nationality of the majority of team members.\n\nIn the UAE and other GCC states, for instance, nationality is not frequently given to residents and expatriates. In the workplace, preferential treatment is given to full citizens, even though many of them lack experience or motivation to do the job. State benefits are also generally available for citizens only.\n\nRacial and ethnic discrimination differentiates individuals on the basis of real and perceived racial and ethnic differences and leads to various forms of ethnic penalty. It has been official government policy in several countries, such as South Africa in the apartheid era. Discriminatory policies towards ethnic minorities include the race-based discrimination of ethnic Indians and Chinese in Malaysia After the Vietnam war, many Vietnamese refugees moved to the United States, where they face discrimination.\n\n, aboriginal people (First Nations, Métis, and Inuit) comprise 4 percent of Canada's population, but account for 23.2 percent of the federal prison population. According to the Australian government's June 2006 publication of prison statistics, Aborigines make up 24% of the overall prison population in Australia.\n\nIn 2004, Māori made up just 15% of the total population of New Zealand but 49.5% of prisoners. Māori were entering prison at eight times the rate of non-Māori. A quarter of the people in England's prisons are from an ethnic minority. The Equality and Human Rights Commission found that in England and Wales , a black person was five times more likely to be imprisoned than a white person. The discrepancy was attributed to \"decades of racial prejudice in the criminal justice system\".\n\nIn the United States, racial profiling of minorities by law-enforcement officials has been called racial discrimination.<br> Within the criminal justice system in the United States, minorities are convicted and imprisoned disproportionately when compared to the majority. As early as 1866, the Civil Rights Act and Civil Rights Act of 1871 provided a remedy for intentional racism in employment by private employers and state and local public employers. The Civil Rights Act of 1991 expanded the damages available in Title VII cases and granted Title VII plaintiffs the right to a jury trial.\n\nRacial discrimination in hiring has been shown to exist in the United States and in Europe. By means of their path breaking field experiment, Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, showed that applications from job candidates with white-sounding names got 50 percent more callbacks for interviews than those with African-American-sounding names in the United States at the start of this millennium. A 2009 study by Devah Pager, Bruce Western, and Bart Bonikowski found that black applicants to low-wage jobs were half as likely as identically qualified white applicants to receive callbacks or job offers. More recently, Stijn Baert, Bart Cockx, Niels Gheyle and Cora Vandamme replicated and extended their field experiment in Belgium, Europe. They found that racial discrimination in the labour market is heterogeneous by the labour market tightness in the occupation: compared to natives, candidates with a foreign-sounding name are equally often invited to a job interview in Belgium if they apply for occupations for which vacancies are difficult to fill, but they have to send twice as many applications for occupations for which labor market tightness is low.\n\nRegional or geographic discrimination is discrimination based on the region in which a person lives or was born. It differs from national discrimination in that it may not be based on national borders or the country the victim lives in, but is instead based on prejudices against a specific region of one or more countries. Examples include discrimination against mainland Chinese within China, or discrimination against Americans from the south or from the north in the United States. It is often accompanied by discrimination based on accent, dialect, or cultural differences.\n\nReligious discrimination is valuing or treating a person or group differently because of what they do or do not believe or because of their feelings towards a given religion. For instance, the indigenous Christian population of the Balkans, known as \"rayah\" or \"protected flock\", was discriminated under the Ottoman Kanun–i–Rayah. The word is sometimes translated as 'cattle' rather than 'flock' or 'subjects' to emphasize the inferior status to the Muslim rayah.\n\nRestrictions upon Jewish occupations were imposed by Christian authorities. Local rulers and church officials closed many professions to religious Jews, pushing them into marginal roles considered socially inferior, such as tax and rent collecting and moneylending, occupations only tolerated as a \"necessary evil\". The number of Jews permitted to reside in different places was limited; they were concentrated in ghettos and were not allowed to own land.\n\nIn a 1979 consultation on the issue, the United States commission on civil rights defined religious discrimination in relation to the civil rights guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Whereas religious civil liberties, such as the right to hold or not to hold a religious belief, are essential for Freedom of Religion (in the United States secured by the First Amendment), religious discrimination occurs when someone is denied \" the equal protection of the laws, equality of status under the law, equal treatment in the administration of justice, and equality of opportunity and access to employment, education, housing, public services and facilities, and public accommodation because of their exercise of their right to religious freedom.\"\n\nIn 2015, attorney and author Roberta Kaplan stated that Kim Davis \"is the clearest example of someone who wants to use a religious liberty argument to discriminate.\"\n\nThough gender discrimination and sexism refer to beliefs and attitudes in relation to the gender of a person, such beliefs and attitudes are of a social nature and do not, normally, carry any legal consequences. Sex discrimination, on the other hand, may have legal consequences. Though what constitutes sex discrimination varies between countries, the essence is that it is an adverse action taken by one person against another person that would not have occurred had the person been of another sex. Discrimination of that nature is considered a form of prejudice and in certain enumerated circumstances is illegal in many countries.\n\nSexual discrimination can arise in different contexts. For instance, an employee may be discriminated against by being asked discriminatory questions during a job interview, or by an employer not hiring or promoting, unequally paying, or wrongfully terminating, an employee based on their gender. Sexual discrimination can also arise when the dominant group holds a bias against the minority group. One such example is Wikipedia. In the Wikipedian community, around 13 percent of registered users are women. This creates gender imbalances, and leaves room for systemic bias. Women are not only more harshly scrutinized, but the representation of women authors are also overlooked. Relative to men, across all source lists, women have a 2.6 greater odds of omission in Wikipedia. In an educational setting, there could be claims that a student was excluded from an educational institution, program, opportunity, loan, student group, or scholarship because of their gender. In the housing setting, there could be claims that a person was refused negotiations on seeking a house, contracting/leasing a house or getting a loan based on their gender. Another setting where there have been claims of gender discrimination is banking; for example if one is refused credit or is offered unequal loan terms based on one’s gender. As with other forms of unlawful discrimination, there are two types of sex discrimination – direct discrimination and indirect discrimination. Direct sex discrimination is fairly easy to spot – ‘Barmaid wanted’, but indirect sex discrimination, where an unnecessary requirement puts one sex at a disproportionate disadvantage compared to the opposite sex, is sometimes less easy to spot, although some are obvious – ‘Bar person wanted – must look good in a mini skirt’. Another setting where there is usually gender discrimination is when one is refused to extend their credit, refused approval of credit/loan process, and if there is a burden of unequal loan terms based on one’s gender.\n\nSocially, sexual differences have been used to justify different roles for men and women, in some cases giving rise to claims of primary and secondary roles. While there are alleged non-physical differences between men and women, major reviews of the academic literature on gender difference find only a tiny minority of characteristics where there are consistent psychological differences between men and women, and these relate directly to experiences grounded in biological difference. However, there are also some psychological differences in regard to how problems are dealt with and emotional perceptions and reactions that may relate to hormones and the successful characteristics of each gender during longstanding roles in past primitive lifestyles. Unfair discrimination usually follows the gender stereotyping held by a society.\n\nThe United Nations had concluded that women often experience a \"glass ceiling\" and that there are no societies in which women enjoy the same opportunities as men. The term \"glass ceiling\" is used to describe a perceived barrier to advancement in employment based on discrimination, especially sex discrimination. In the United States in 1995, the Glass Ceiling Commission, a government-funded group, stated: \"Over half of all Master’s degrees are now awarded to women, yet 95% of senior-level managers, of the top Fortune 1000 industrial and 500 service companies are men. Of them, 97% are white.\" In its report, it recommended affirmative action, which is the consideration of an employee's gender and race in hiring and promotion decisions, as a means to end this form of discrimination. , women accounted for 51% of workers in high-paying management, professional, and related occupations. They outnumbered men in such occupations as public relations managers, financial managers, and human resource managers.\n\nIn addition, women are found to experience a sticky floor. While a glass ceiling implies that women are less like to reach the top of the job ladder, a sticky floor is defined as the pattern that women are, compared to men, less likely to start to climb the job ladder. A sticky floor is related to gender differences at the bottom of the wage distribution. It might be explained by both employer discrimination and gender differences in career aspirations.\n\nIntersex persons experience discrimination due to innate, atypical sex characteristics. Multiple jurisdictions now protect individuals on grounds of \"intersex status\" or \"sex characteristics\". South Africa was the first country to explicitly add intersex to legislation, as part of the attribute of 'sex'. Australia was the first country to add an independent attribute, of 'intersex status'. Malta was the first to adopt a broader framework of 'sex characteristics', through legislation that also ended modifications to the sex characteristics of minors undertaken for social and cultural reasons.\n\nTransgender individuals, whether male-to-female, female-to-male, or genderqueer, often experience transphobic problems that often lead to dismissals, underachievement, difficulty in finding a job, social isolation, and, occasionally, violent attacks against them. Nevertheless, the problem of gender discrimination does not stop at transgender individuals or with women. Men are often the victim in certain areas of employment as men begin to seek work in office and childcare settings traditionally perceived as \"women's jobs\". One such situation seems to be evident in a recent case concerning alleged YMCA discrimination and a Federal Court Case in Texas. The case actually involves alleged discrimination against both men and black people in childcare, even when they pass the same strict background tests and other standards of employment. It is currently being contended in federal court, as of fall 2009.\n\nDiscrimination in slasher films is relevant. Gloria Cowan had a research group study on 57 different slasher films. Their results showed that the non-surviving females were more frequently sexual than the surviving females and the non-surviving males. Surviving as a female slasher victim was strongly associated with the absence of sexual behavior. In slasher films, the message appears to be that sexual women get killed and only the pure women survive, thus reinforcing the idea that female sexuality can be costly.\n\nOne’s sexual orientation is a \"predilection for homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality\". Like most minority groups, homosexuals and bisexuals are vulnerable to prejudice and discrimination from the majority group. They may experience hatred from others because of their sexual preferences; a term for such hatred based upon one’s sexual orientation is often called homophobia. Many continue to hold negative feelings towards those with non-heterosexual orientations and will discriminate against people who have them or are thought to have them. People of other uncommon sexual orientations also experience discrimination. One study found its sample of heterosexuals to be more prejudiced against asexuals than to homosexuals or bisexuals.\n\nEmployment discrimination based on sexual orientation varies by country. Revealing a lesbian sexual orientation (by means of mentioning an engagement in a rainbow organisation or by mentioning one's partner name) lowers employment opportunities in Cyprus and Greece but has, overall, no negative effect in Sweden and Belgium. In the latter country, even a positive effect of revealing a lesbian sexual orientation is found for women at their fertile ages.\n\nBesides these academic studies, in 2009, ILGA published a report based on research carried out by Daniel Ottosson at Södertörn University College, Stockholm, Sweden. This research found that of the 80 countries around the world that continue to consider homosexuality illegal, five carry the death penalty for homosexual activity, and two do in some regions of the country. In the report, this is described as \"State sponsored homophobia\". This happens in Islamic states, or in two cases regions under Islamic authority. On February 5, 2005, the IRIN issued a reported titled \"Iraq: Male homosexuality still a taboo.\" The article stated, among other things that honor killings by Iraqis against a gay family member are common and given some legal protection. In August 2009, Human Rights Watch published an extensive report detailing torture of men accused of being gay in Iraq, including the blocking of men's anuses with glue and then giving the men laxatives. Although gay marriage has been legal in South Africa since 2006, same-sex unions are often condemned as \"un-African.\" Research conducted in 2009 shows 86% of black lesbians from the Western Cape live in fear of sexual assault.\nA number of countries, especially those in the Western world, have passed measures to alleviate discrimination against sexual minorities, including laws against anti-gay hate crimes and workplace discrimination. Some have also legalized same-sex marriage or civil unions in order to grant same-sex couples the same protections and benefits as opposite-sex couples. In 2011, the United Nations passed its first resolution recognizing LGBT rights.\n\nDrug use discrimination is the unequal treatment people experience because of the drugs they use. People who use or have used illicit drugs may face discrimination in employment, welfare, housing, child custody, and travel, in addition to imprisonment, asset forfeiture, and in some cases forced labor, torture, and execution. Though often prejudicially stereotyped as deviants and misfits, most drug users are well-adjusted and productive members of society. Drug prohibitions may have been partly motivated by racism and other prejudice against minorities, and racial disparities have been found to exist in the enforcement and prosecution of drug laws. Discrimination due to illicit drug use was the most commonly reported type of discrimination among Blacks and Latinos in a 2003 study of minority drug users in New York City, double to triple that due to race. People who use legal drugs such as tobacco and prescription medications may also face discrimination.\n\nIdeas of self-ownership and cognitive liberty affirm rights to use drugs, whether for medicine recreation, or spiritual fulfilment. Those espousing such ideas question the legality of drug prohibition and cite the rights and freedoms enshrined in such documents as the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights, the European Convention on Human Rights, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as protecting personal drug choices. They are inspired by and see themselves following in the tradition of those who have struggled against other forms of discrimination in the past.\n\nDrug policy reform organizations such as the Drug Policy Alliance, the Drug Equality Alliance, the Transform Drug Policy Foundation, and the Beckley Foundation have highlighted the issue of stigma and discrimination in drug policy. The Partnership for Drug-Free Kids also recognizes this issue and shares on its website stories that \"break through the stigma and discrimination that people with drug or drinking problems often face.\"\n\nA report issued by the Global Commission on Drug Policy, critical of the global war on drugs, states, under \"Undermining Human Rights, Fostering Discrimination\":\n\nPunitive approaches to drug policy are severely undermining human rights in every region of the world. They lead to the erosion of civil liberties and fair trial standards, the stigmatization of individuals and groups – particularly women, young people, and ethnic minorities – and the imposition of abusive and inhumane punishments.\n\nAlthough still illegal at the federal level, about half of U.S. states have legalized marijuana for medical use and several of those states have laws, or are considering legislation, specifically protecting medical marijuana patients from discrimination in such areas as education, employment, housing, child custody, and organ transplantation.\n\nOthering is the process by which a person or a group is placed outside of the norm, into the margins. It is a system of discrimination whereby the characteristics of a group are used to distinguish them as separate from the norm. Othering plays a fundamental role in the history and continuance of racism and other forms of discrimination. For example, by objectifying culture as something different, exotic or underdeveloped is to generalise that it is not the same as 'normal' society. Europe's colonial attitude towards the Orient exemplifies through the attitude that the East was the opposite of the West; feminine where the West was masculine, weak where the West was strong and traditional where the West was progressive. By making these generalisations and othering the East, Europe was simultaneously defining herself as the norm, further entrenching the perceived gap. Much of the process of othering relies on imagined difference, or the expectation of difference. Spatial difference can be enough to conclude that 'we' are 'here' and the 'others' are over 'there', making 'here' normal and 'there' foreign. Imagined differences serve to categorise people into groups and assign them characteristics that suit the imaginer's expectations and desires.\n\nFrom a political scope one can also consider redlining and mortgage lenders. Redlining is a discriminatory practice that forces more in real estate and all that attributes to it, typically involving lenders that refuse to lend money or extend credit to borrowers in certain areas of town. Although segregation and informal discrimination had existed in the United States since the Civil Rights movement, the specific practice called \"redlining\" began with the National Housing Act of 1934, which established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The Federal Housing Administration, generally known as \"FHA\", provides mortgage insurance on loans made by FHA-approved lenders throughout the United States and its territories. In the 1960s, a sociologist named John McKnight coined the term \"redlining\" to describe the discriminatory practice of fencing off areas where banks would avoid investments based on community demographics. Areas most frequently discriminated against were black inner city neighborhoods. Concentrated areas often suffer through the same type of discrimination based on other factors aside of color. Blacklisting is the action of a group or authority, compiling a blacklist (or black list) of people, countries or other entities to be avoided or distrusted as not being acceptable to those making the list. Through the study of investigative reporter Bill Dedman showed that banks would often lend to lower-income whites but not to middle- or upper-income blacks. The implementation of this federal policy aggravated the decay of minority inner city neighborhoods caused by the withholding of mortgage capital, and made it even more difficult for neighborhoods to attract and retain families able to purchase homes. In addition, the Fair Housing Act, which is part of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, \"prohibits\" discrimination against neighborhoods based on their racial composition. Following a National Housing Conference in 1973, a group of Chicago community organizations led by The Northwest Community Organization (NCO) formed National People's Action (NPA), to broaden the fight against disinvestment and mortgage redlining in neighborhoods all over the country.\n\nSome attempts at antidiscrimination have been criticized as reverse discrimination. In particular, minority quotas (for example, affirmative action) may discriminate against members of a dominant or majority group or other minority groups. In its opposition to race preferences, the American Civil Rights Institute's Ward Connerly stated, \"There is nothing positive, affirmative, or equal about 'affirmative action' programs that give preference to some groups based on race.\"\n\nAustralia\nCanada\nHong Kong\nIsrael\n\nNetherlands\n\nUnited Kingdom\nUnited States\n\nSocial theories such as egalitarianism assert that social equality should prevail. In some societies, including most developed countries, each individual's civil rights include the right to be free from government sponsored social discrimination. Due to a belief in the capacity to perceive pain or suffering shared by all animals, \"abolitionist\" or \"vegan\" egalitarianism maintains that the interests of every individual (regardless its species), warrant equal consideration with the interests of humans, and that not doing so is \"speciesist\".\n\nDiscrimination, in labeling theory, takes form as mental categorization of minorities and the use of stereotype. This theory describes difference as deviance from the norm, which results in internal devaluation and social stigma that may be seen as discrimination. It is started by describing a \"natural\" social order. It is distinguished between the fundamental principle of fascism and social democracy. The Nazis in 1930s-era Germany and the pre-1990 Apartheid government of South Africa used racially discriminatory agendas for their political ends. This practice continues with some present day governments.\n\nEconomist Yanis Varoufakis (2013) argues that \"discrimination based on utterly arbitrary characteristics\nevolves quickly and systematically in the experimental laboratory\", and that neither classical game theory nor neoclassical economics can explain this. Varoufakis and Shaun Hargreaves-Heap (2002) ran an experiment where volunteers played a computer-mediated, multiround hawk-dove game (HD game). At the start of each session, each participant was assigned a color at random, either red or blue. At each round, each player learned the color assigned to his or her opponent, but nothing else about the opponent. Hargreaves-Heap and Varoufakis found that the players' behavior within a session frequently developed a discriminatory convention, giving a Nash equilibrium where players of one color (the \"advantaged\" color) consistently played the aggressive \"hawk\" strategy against players of the other, \"disadvantaged\" color, who played the acquiescent \"dove\" strategy against the advantaged color. Players of both colors used a mixed strategy when playing against players assigned the same color as their own.\n\nThe experimenters then added a cooperation option to the game, and found that disadvantaged players usually cooperated with each other, while advantaged players usually did not. They state that while the equilibria reached in the original HD game are predicted by evolutionary game theory, game theory does not explain the emergence of cooperation in the disadvantaged group. Citing earlier psychological work of Matthew Rabin, they hypothesize that a norm of differing entitlements emerges across the two groups, and that this norm could define a \"fairness\" equilibrium within the disadvantaged group.\n\nWhen the \"Jim Crow\" racial segregation laws were enacted in the U.S., many companies disobeyed them for years, because the market automatically punishes companies that discriminate: they lose customers and get additional expenses. It took 15 years for the government to break down the resistance of the companies.\n\nIn \"The Welfare Implications of Becker's Discrimination Coefficient\", Richard S. Toikka disagrees, citing the ambivalent relations between discrimination and economic efficiency, as shown by the literature. According to Toikka the \"discriminatory tastes\", in Becker's explanation, was shown to be problematic because it implies discrimination is efficient. Further, the very aim of the markets is to cater efficiently for the different \"tastes\" of all individuals, including customers, employees, employers, and firm owners (and discrimination happens within and between all these groups). If discrimination were just another \"taste\", then the markets were not to punish for it. Second, microeconomic theory turns to unusual method – explicit treatment of production functions – when it analyzes discrimination. And third, the very existence of discrimination in employment (defined as wages which differ from marginal product of the discriminated employees) at the long run, contradicts perfect competition and efficiency (which imply equality of wages and the said marginal product). Hence, the very existence of discrimination at the long run, contradicts the claim that the markets function well and punish the discriminators.\n\n"}
{"id": "8904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8904", "title": "Double-ended queue", "text": "Double-ended queue\n\nIn computer science, a double-ended queue (dequeue, often abbreviated to deque) is an abstract data type that generalizes a queue, for which elements can be added to or removed from either the front (head) or back (tail). It is also often called a head-tail linked list, though properly this refers to a specific data structure \"implementation\" of a deque (see below).\n\n\"Deque\" is sometimes written \"dequeue\", but this use is generally deprecated in technical literature or technical writing because \"dequeue\" is also a verb meaning \"to remove from a queue\". Nevertheless, several libraries and some writers, such as Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman in their textbook \"Data Structures and Algorithms\", spell it \"dequeue\". John Mitchell, author of \"Concepts in Programming Languages,\" also uses this terminology.\n\nThis differs from the queue abstract data type or First-In-First-Out List (FIFO), where elements can only be added to one end and removed from the other. This general data class has some possible sub-types:\n\n\nBoth the basic and most common list types in computing, queues and stacks can be considered specializations of deques, and can be implemented using deques.\n\nThe basic operations on a deque are \"enqueue\" and \"dequeue\" on either end. Also generally implemented are \"peek\" operations, which return the value at that end without dequeuing it.\n\nNames vary between languages; major implementations include:\nThere are at least two common ways to efficiently implement a deque: with a modified dynamic array or with a doubly linked list.\n\nThe dynamic array approach uses a variant of a dynamic array that can grow from both ends, sometimes called array deques. These array deques have all the properties of a dynamic array, such as constant-time random access, good locality of reference, and inefficient insertion/removal in the middle, with the addition of amortized constant-time insertion/removal at both ends, instead of just one end. Three common implementations include:\n\nDouble-ended queues can also be implemented as a purely functional data structure. Two versions of the implementation exist. The first one, called \"'real-time deque\", is presented below. It allows the queue to be persistent with operations in formula_1 worst-case time, but requires lazy lists with memoization. The second one, with no lazy lists nor memoization is presented at the end of the sections. Its amortized time is formula_1 if the persistency is not used; but the worst-time complexity of an operation is formula_3 where formula_4 is the number of elements in the double-ended queue.\n\nLet us recall that, for a list codice_1, codice_2 denotes its length, that codice_3 represents an empty list and codice_4 represents the list whose head is codice_5 and whose tail is codice_6. The functions codice_7 and codice_8 return the list codice_1 without its first codice_10 elements, and the codice_10's first elements respectively. Or, if codice_12, they return the empty list and codice_1 respectively.\n\nA double-ended queue is represented as a sixtuple codice_14 where codice_15 is a linked list which contains the front of the queue of length codice_16. Similarly, codice_17 is a linked list which represents the reverse of the rear of the queue, of length codice_18. Furthermore, it is assured that codice_19 and codice_20 - intuitively, it means that neither the front nor the rear contains more than a third of the list plus one element. Finally, codice_21 and codice_22 are tails of codice_15 and of codice_17, they allow to schedule the moment where some lazy operations are forced. Note that, when a double-ended queue contains codice_25 elements in the front list and codice_25 elements in the rear list, then the inequality invariant remains satisfied after codice_10 insertions and codice_28 deletions when codice_29. That is, at most codice_30 operations can happen between each rebalancing.\n\nIntuitively, inserting an element codice_31 in front of the double-ended queue codice_32 leads almost to the double-ended queue codice_33, the head and the tail of the double-ended queue codice_34 are codice_31 and almost codice_36 respectively, and the head and the tail of codice_37 are codice_31 and codice_39 respectively. The function to insert an element in the rear, or to drop the last element of the double-ended queue, are similar to the above function which deal with the front of the double-ended queue. It is said \"almost\" because, after insertion and after an application of \"tail\", the invariant codice_20 may not be satisfied anymore. In this case it is required to rebalance the double-ended queue.\n\nIn order to avoid an operation with an codice_41 costs, the algorithm uses laziness with memoization, and force the rebalancing to be partly done during the following codice_42 operations, that is, before the following rebalancing. In order to create the scheduling, some auxiliary lazy functions are required. The function codice_43 returns the list codice_15, followed by the list codice_17, and followed by the list codice_46. It is required in this function that codice_47 is 2 or 3. This function is defined by induction as codice_48 where ++ is the concatenation operation, and by codice_49. It should be noted that, codice_50 returns the list codice_15 followed by the list codice_17 reversed. The function codice_53 which returns codice_15 followed by (codice_17 without codice_56's first element) reversed is also required, for codice_57. It is defined by codice_58, codice_59 and codice_60.\n\nThe balancing function can now be defined with\nNote that, without the lazy part of the implementation, this would be a non-persistent implementation of queue in codice_61 amortized time. In this case, the lists codice_21 and codice_22 can be removed from the representation of the double-ended queue.\n\nAda's containers provides the generic packages Ada.Containers.Vectors and Ada.Containers.Doubly_Linked_Lists, for the dynamic array and linked list implementations, respectively.\n\nC++'s Standard Template Library provides the class templates std::deque and std::list, for the multiple array and linked list implementations, respectively.\n\nAs of Java 6, Java's Collections Framework provides a new interface that provides the functionality of insertion and removal at both ends. It is implemented by classes such as (also new in Java 6) and , providing the dynamic array and linked list implementations, respectively. However, the ArrayDeque, contrary to its name, does not support random access.\n\nPerl's arrays have native support for both removing (shift and pop) and adding (unshift and push) elements on both ends.\n\nPython 2.4 introduced the codice_64 module with support for deque objects. It is implemented using a doubly linked list of fixed-length subarrays.\n\nAs of PHP 5.3, PHP's SPL extension contains the 'SplDoublyLinkedList' class that can be used to implement Deque datastructures. Previously to make a Deque structure the array functions array_shift/unshift/pop/push had to be used instead.\n\nGHC's Data.Sequence module implements an efficient, functional deque structure in Haskell. The implementation uses 2–3 finger trees annotated with sizes. There are other (fast) possibilities to implement purely functional (thus also persistent) double queues (most using heavily lazy evaluation). Kaplan and Tarjan were the first to implement optimal confluently persistent catenable deques. Their implementation was strictly purely functional in the sense that it did not use lazy evaluation. Okasaki simplified the data structure by using lazy evaluation with a bootstrapped data structure and degrading the performance bounds from worst-case to amortized. Kaplan, Okasaki, and Tarjan produced a simpler, non-bootstrapped, amortized version that can be implemented either using lazy evaluation or more efficiently using mutation in a broader but still restricted fashion. Mihaesau and Tarjan created a simpler (but still highly complex) strictly purely functional implementation of catenable deques, and also a much simpler implementation of strictly purely functional non-catenable deques, both of which have optimal worst-case bounds.\n\n\nOne example where a deque can be used is the \"A-Steal\" job scheduling algorithm. This algorithm implements task scheduling for several processors. A separate deque with threads to be executed is maintained for each processor. To execute the next thread, the processor gets the first element from the deque (using the \"remove first element\" deque operation). If the current thread forks, it is put back to the front of the deque (\"insert element at front\") and a new thread is executed. When one of the processors finishes execution of its own threads (i.e. its deque is empty), it can \"steal\" a thread from another processor: it gets the last element from the deque of another processor (\"remove last element\") and executes it. The steal-job scheduling algorithm is used by Intel's Threading Building Blocks (TBB) library for parallel programming.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8905", "title": "Diene", "text": "Diene\n\nIn organic chemistry a diene ( ) or diolefin ( ) is a hydrocarbon that contains two carbon double bonds. Dienes occur occasionally in nature. Conjugated dienes are widely used as monomers in the polymer industry.\n\nDienes can be divided into three classes, depending on the relative location of the double bonds: \n\nCompounds that contain more than two double bonds are called polyenes. Polyenes and dienes share many of their properties.\n\nOn an industrial scale, butadiene is prepared by thermal cracking of butanes. In a similarly non-selective process, dicyclopentadiene is obtained from coal tars.\n\nIn the laboratory, more directed and more delicate processes are employed such as dehydrohalogenations and condensations. Myriad methods have been developed, such as the Whiting reaction. Families of nonconjugated dienes are derived from the oligomerization and dimerization of conjugated dienes. For example, 1,5-cyclooctadiene and vinylcyclohexene are produced by dimerization of 1,3-butadiene.\n\nDiene-containing fatty acids are biosynthesized from acetyl CoA.\n\nThe most heavily practiced reaction of alkenes, dienes included, is polymerization. 1,3-Butadiene is a precursor to rubber used in tires, and isoprene is the precursor to natural rubber. Chloroprene is related but it is a synthetic monomer.\n\nAn important reaction for conjugated dienes is the Diels–Alder reaction. Many specialized dienes have been developed to exploit this reactivity for the synthesis of natural products (e.g., Danishefsky's diene).\n\nConjugated dienes add reagents such as bromine and hydrogen by both 1,2-addition and 1,4-addition pathways. Addition of polar reagents can generate complex architectures:\n\nNonconjugated dienes are substrates for ring-closing metathesis reactions. These reactions require a metal catalyst:\n\nThe position adjacent to a double bond is acidic because the resulting allyl anion is stabilized by resonance. This effect becomes more pronounced as more alkenes are involved to create greater stability. For example, deprotonation at position 3 of a 1,4-diene or position 5 of a 1,3-diene give a pentadienyl anion. An even greater effect is seen if the anion is aromatic, for example, deprotonation of cyclopentadiene to give the cyclopentadienyl anion.\n\nDienes are widely used chelating ligands in organometallic chemistry. In some cases they serve as placeholder ligands, being removed during a catalytic cycle. For example, the cyclooctadiene (\"cod\") ligands in bis(cyclooctadiene)nickel(0) are labile. In some cases, dienes are spectator ligands, remaining coordinated throughout a catalytic cycle and influencing the product distributions. Chiral dienes have also been described.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8906", "title": "Diatessaron", "text": "Diatessaron\n\nThe Diatessaron; (), (c. 160–175) is the most prominent early Gospel harmony, and was created by Tatian, an early Christian Assyrian apologist and ascetic. Tatian sought to combine all the textual material he found in the four gospels—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John—into a single coherent narrative of Jesus's life and death. However, and in contradistinction to most later gospel harmonists, Tatian appears not to have been motivated by any aspiration to validate the four separate canonical gospel accounts; or to demonstrate that, as they stood, they could each be shown as being without inconsistency or error.\n\nTatian's harmony follows the gospels closely in terms of text but, in order to fit all the canonical material in, he created his own narrative sequence, which is different from both the synoptic sequence and John's sequence; and occasionally creates intervening time periods that are found in none of the source accounts. This sequence is coherent and consistent within itself, but not necessarily consistent with that in all or any of the separate canonical gospels; and Tatian apparently applies the same principle in respect of the narrative itself. Where the gospels differ from one another in respect of the details of an event or teaching; the Diatessaron resolves such apparent contradictions by selecting one or another alternative wording and adding consistent details from the other gospels; while omitting apparent duplicate matter, especially across the synoptics. Hence, in respect of the healing of the blind at Jericho the Diatessaron reports only one blind man, Bartimeaus, healed by Jesus when leaving the city according to the account in Mark 10:46ff (expanded with phrases from Luke 18:36-37); consequently omitting any separate mention of two unnamed blind men healed by Jesus leaving Jericho (Matthew 20:29ff), and also the healing by Jesus entering Jericho the previous day of a single unnamed blind man (Luke 18:35ff).\n\nOtherwise, Tatian originally omitted altogether both of the different genealogies in Matthew and Luke, as well as Luke's introduction (Luke 1: 1-4); and also did not originally include Jesus' encounter with the adulteress (John 7:53–8:11). This latter passage is, however, generally considered to be a late addition to the Gospel of John, with the Diatessaron itself often cited as an early textual witness in support of its omission. Most scholars agree that Tatian did, from the beginning, include the longer ending of Mark (Mark 16: 9-20), and correspondingly is amongst the earliest witnesses to this inclusion. Tatian added no significant wording to the textual material he took from the separate gospels. Only 56 verses in the canonical Gospels do not have a counterpart in the Diatessaron, mostly the genealogies and the \"Pericope Adulterae\". The final work is about 72% the length of the four gospels put together; around a quarter of the text of the separate gospels being adjudged by Tatian to be duplicated. (McFall, 1994).\n\nIn the early Church, the gospels at first circulated independently, with Matthew the most popular. The Diatessaron is notable evidence for the authority already enjoyed by the four gospels by the mid-2nd century. Twenty years after Tatian's harmony, Irenaeus expressly proclaimed the authoritative character of the four gospels. It is unclear whether Tatian intended the Diatessaron to supplement or replace the four separate gospels; but both outcomes came to pass in different churches. The Diatessaron became adopted as the standard lectionary text of the gospels in some Syriac-speaking churches from the late 2nd to the 5th century, when it gave way to the four separate Gospels, in the Peshitta version. At the same time, in the churches of the Latin west, the Diatessaron circulated as a supplement to the four gospels, especially in the Latin translation.\n\nTatian was an Assyrian who was a pupil of Justin Martyr in Rome, where, Justin says, the \"apomnemoneumata\" (recollections or memoirs) of the Apostles, the gospels, were read every Sunday. When Justin quotes the synoptic Gospels, he tends to do so in a harmonised form, and Helmut Koester and others conclude that Justin must have possessed a Greek harmony text of Matthew, Luke and Mark.\n\nIf so, it is unclear how much Tatian may have borrowed from this previous author in determining his own narrative sequence of Gospel elements. It is equally unclear whether Tatian took the Syriac Gospel texts composited into his Diatessaron from a previous translation, or whether the translation was his own. Where the Diatessaron records Gospel quotations from the Jewish Scriptures, the text appears to agree with that found in the Syriac Peshitta Old Testament rather than that found in the Greek Septuagint—as used by the original Gospel authors. The majority consensus is that the Peshitta Old Testament preceded the Diatessaron, and represents an independent translation from the Hebrew Bible. Resolution of these scholarly questions remained very difficult so long as no complete version of the \"Diatessaron\" in Syriac or Greek had been recovered; while the medieval translations that had survived—in Arabic and Latin—both relied on texts that had been heavily corrected to conform better with later canonical versions of the separate Gospel texts.\n\nThere is scholarly uncertainty about what language Tatian used for its original composition, whether Syriac or Greek. Modern scholarship tends to favour a Syriac origin; but even so, the exercise must have been repeated in Greek very shortly afterwards—probably by Tatian himself.\n\nThe \"Diatessaron\" was used as the standard Gospel text in the liturgy of at least some sections of the Syrian Church for possibly up to two centuries and was quoted or alluded to by Syrian writers. Ephrem the Syrian wrote a commentary on it, the Syriac original of which was rediscovered only in 1957, when a manuscript acquired by Sir Chester Beatty in 1957 (now Chester Beatty Syriac MS 709, Dublin) turned out to contain the text of Ephrem's commentary. The manuscript constituted approximately half of the leaves of a volume of Syriac writings that had been catalogued in 1952 in the library of the Coptic monastery of Deir es-Suriani in Wadi Natrun, Egypt. Subsequently, the Chester Beatty library was able to track down and buy a further 42 leaves, so that now approximately eighty per cent of the Syriac commentary is available (McCarthy 1994). Ephrem did not comment on all passages in the Diatessaron, and nor does he always quote commentated passages in full; but for those phrases that he does quote, the commentary provides for the first time a dependable witness to Tatian's original; and also confirms its content and their sequence. .\n\nHow the Gospel text that was a standard in Syriac Christianity for possibly as long as two centuries should have utterly disappeared requires explaining. Theodoret, bishop of Cyrrhus on the Euphrates in upper Syria in 423, suspecting Tatian of having been a heretic, sought out and found more than two hundred copies of the \"Diatessaron\", which he \"collected and put away, and introduced instead of them the Gospels of the four evangelists\". Thus the harmonisation was replaced in the 5th century by the canonical four gospels individually, in the Peshitta version, whose Syriac text nevertheless contains many Diatessaronic readings. Gradually, without extant copies to which to refer, the Diatessaron developed a reputation for having been heretical.\n\nNo Christian tradition, other than some Syriac ones, has ever adopted a harmonized Gospel text for use in its liturgy. However, in many traditions, it was not unusual for subsequent Christian generations to seek to provide paraphrased Gospel versions in language closer to the vernacular of their own day. Frequently such versions have been constructed as Gospel harmonies, sometimes taking Tatian's Diatessaron as an exemplar; other times proceeding independently. Hence from the Syriac Diatessaron text was derived an 11th-century Arabic harmony (the source for the published versions of the Diatessaron in English); and a 13th-century Persian harmony. The Arabic harmony preserves Tatian's sequence exactly, but uses a source text corrected in most places to that of the standard Syriac Peshitta Gospels; the Persian harmony differs greatly in sequence, but translates a Syriac text that is rather closer to that in Ephrem's commentary.\n\nAn 'Old Latin' version of Tatian's Syriac text appears to have circulated in the West from the late 2nd century; with a sequence adjusted to conform more closely to that of the canonical Gospel of Luke; and also including additional canonical text (such as the pericope of the adulteress), as well, possibly, as non-canonical matter from the Gospel of the Hebrews. With the gradual adoption of the Vulgate as the liturgical Gospel text of the Latin Church, the Latin Diatessaron was increasingly modified to conform to Vulgate readings. In 546 Victor of Capua discovered such a mixed manuscript; and, further corrected by Victor so as to provide a very pure Vulgate text within a modified Diatessaron sequence and to restore the two genealogies of Jesus side-by-side, this harmony, the Codex Fuldensis, survives in the monastic library at Fulda, where it served as the source text for vernacular harmonies in Old High German, Eastern Frankish and Old Saxon (the alliterative poem 'Heliand'). The older mixed Vulgate/Diatessaron text type also appears to have continued as a distinct tradition, as such texts appear to underlie surviving 13th–14th century Gospel harmonies in Middle Dutch, Middle High German, Middle French, Middle English, Tuscan and Venetian; although no example of this hypothetical Latin sub-text has ever been identified. The Liège Diatessaron is a particularly poetic example. This Latin Diatessaron textual tradition has also been suggested as underlying the enigmatic 16th century Islam-influenced Gospel of Barnabas (Joosten, 2002).\n\nThe title \"Diatessaron\" comes from the Latin \"diatessarōn\" (\"made of four [ingredients]\"), derived in turn from Greek, διὰ τεσσάρων (\"dia tessarōn\") (\"out of four\"; i.e., \"διά, dia\", \"at intervals of\" and \"tessarōn\" [genitive of τέσσαρες, \"tessares\"], \"four\").\n\nThe Syriac name for this gospel harmony is \" (Ewangeliyôn Damhalltê) meaning 'Gospel of the Mixed' while in the other hand we have \" (Evangelion de Mepharreshe) meaning 'Gospel of the separated'.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8910", "title": "Dean Koontz", "text": "Dean Koontz\n\nDean Ray Koontz (born July 9, 1945) is an American author. His novels are broadly described as suspense thrillers, but also frequently incorporate elements of horror, fantasy, science fiction, mystery, and satire. Many of his books have appeared on the \"The New York Times\" Bestseller List, with 14 hardcovers and 14 paperbacks reaching the number one position. Koontz wrote under a number of pen names earlier in his career, including \"David Axton\", \"Leigh Nichols\" and \"Brian Coffey\".\nHe has sold over 450 million copies as reported on his official website.\n\nKoontz was born on July 9, 1945, in Everett, Pennsylvania, the son of Florence (née Logue) and Raymond Koontz. He has said that he was regularly beaten and abused by his alcoholic father, which influenced his later writing, as also did the courage of his physically diminutive mother in standing up to her husband. In his senior year at Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, he won a fiction competition sponsored by Atlantic Monthly magazine. After graduation in 1967, he went to work as an English teacher at Mechanicsburg High School in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania. In the 1960s, Koontz worked for the Appalachian Poverty Program, a federally funded initiative designed to help poor children. In a 1996 interview with \"Reason Magazine\", he said that while the program sounded \"very noble and wonderful, . . . [i]n reality, it was a dumping ground for violent children.. . and most of the funding ended up 'disappearing somewhere.'\" This experience greatly shaped Koontz's political outlook. In his book, \"The Dean Koontz Companion\", he recalled that he:\nrealized that most of these programs are not meant to help anyone, merely to control people and make them dependent. I was forced to reconsider everything I'd once believed. I developed a profound distrust of government regardless of the philosophy of the people in power. I remained a liberal on civil-rights issues, became a conservative on defense, and a semi-libertarian on all other matters.\"\nIn his spare time, he wrote his first novel, \"Star Quest\", which was published in 1968. Koontz went on to write over a dozen science fiction novels. Seeing the Catholic faith as a contrast to the chaos in his family, Koontz converted in college because it gave him answers for his life, admiring its \"intellectual rigor\" and saying it permits a view of life that sees mystery and wonder in all things. He says he sees Catholicism as English writer and Catholic convert G.K. Chesterton did: that it encourages a \"joy about the gift of life\". Koontz says that spirituality has always been part of his books, as are grace and our struggle as fallen souls, but he \"never get[s] on a soapbox\".\n\nIn the 1970s, Koontz began writing suspense and horror fiction, both under his own name and several pseudonyms, sometimes publishing up to eight books a year. Koontz has stated that he began using pen names after several editors convinced him that authors who switched back and forth between different genres invariably fell victim to \"negative crossover\" (alienating established fans and simultaneously failing to pick up any new ones). Known pseudonyms used by Koontz during his career include Deanna Dwyer, K. R. Dwyer, Aaron Wolfe, David Axton, Brian Coffey, John Hill, Leigh Nichols, Owen West, Richard Paige and Anthony North. As Brian Coffey he wrote the \"Mike Tucker\" trilogy [\"Blood Risk\", \"Surrounded\", \"Wall of Masks\"] in acknowledged tribute to the Parker novels of Richard Stark (Donald E. Westlake). Many of Koontz's pseudonymous novels are now available under his real name. Many others remain suppressed by Koontz, who bought back the rights to ensure they could not be republished; he has, on occasion, said that he might revise some for re-publication, but only 3 have appeared - \"Demon Seed\" and \"Invasion\" were both heavily rewritten before they were republished, and \"Prison of Ice\" had certain sections bowdlerised.\n\nAfter writing full-time for more than ten years, Koontz's acknowledged breakthrough novel was \"Whispers\", published in 1980. The two books before that, \"The Key to Midnight\" and \"The Funhouse\", also sold over a million copies, but were written under pen names. Thus although \"Whispers\" is Koontz's third paperback bestseller, it was the second credited to Koontz. His very first bestseller was \"Demon Seed\", the sales of which picked up after the release of the film of the same name in 1977, and sold over two million copies in one year. From 1979 on, Koontz's books regularly became paperback bestsellers. His first hardcover bestseller, which finally promised some financial stability and lifted him out of the midlist hit-and-miss range was his book \"Strangers\".\nSince then, 12 hardcovers and 13 paperbacks written by Koontz have reached #1 on the \"The New York Times\" Bestseller List.\n\nBestselling science fiction writer Brian Herbert has stated that \"I even went through a phase where I read everything that Dean Koontz wrote, and in the process I learned a lot about characterization and building suspense.\"\n\nIn 1997 psychologist Katherine Ramsland published an extensive biography of Koontz based on interviews with him and his family. This \"psychobiography\" (as Ramsland called it) often showed the conception of Koontz's characters and plots from events in his own life.\n\nEarly author photos on the back of many of his novels show a balding Koontz with a mustache. After Koontz underwent hair transplantation surgery in the late 1990s, his subsequent books have featured a new clean-shaven appearance with a fuller head of hair. Koontz explained the change by claiming that he was tired of looking like G. Gordon Liddy. \n\nMany of his novels are set in and around Orange County, California. As of 2006 he lives there with his wife, Gerda (Cerra), in Newport Coast, California behind the gates of Pelican Hills. In 2008 he was the world's sixth most highly paid author, tied with John Grisham, at $25 million annually.\n\nOne of Dean Koontz's pen names was inspired by his dog, Trixie Koontz, a golden retriever, shown in many of his book-jacket photos. Trixie originally was a service dog with Canine Companions for Independence (CCI), a charitable organization that provides service dogs for people with disabilities. Trixie was a gift from CCI in gratitude of Koontz's substantial donations, totaling $2,500,000 between 1991 and 2004. Koontz was taken with the charity while he was researching his novel \"Midnight\", a book which included a CCI-trained dog, a black Labrador retriever, named Moose.\nIn 2004 Koontz wrote and edited \"Life Is Good: Lessons in Joyful Living\" in her name, and in 2005 Koontz wrote a second book credited to Trixie, \"Christmas Is Good\". Both books are written from a supposed canine perspective on the joys of life. The royalties of the books were donated to CCI. In 2007 Trixie contracted terminal cancer that created a tumor in her heart. The Koontzes had her put to sleep outside their family home on June 30. After Trixie's death Koontz has continued writing on his website under Trixie's names in \"TOTOS\", standing for Trixie on the Other Side.\nIt is widely thought that Trixie was his inspiration for his November 2007 book, \"The Darkest Evening of the Year\", about a woman who runs a golden retriever rescue home, and who rescues a 'special' dog, named Nickie, who eventually saves her life. In August 2009 Koontz published \"A Big Little Life,\" a memoir of his life with Trixie.\n\nIn October 2008 Koontz revealed that he had adopted a new dog, Anna. It eventually was learned that Anna was the grandniece of Trixie. Anna died on May 22, 2016. Koontz then adopted a new dog, Elsa, on July 11, 2016.\n\nThere are a number of letters, articles and novels ostensibly written by Koontz during the 1960s and 1970s that he has stated he did not write. These include 30 erotic novels, allegedly written together by Koontz and his wife Gerda, including books such as \"Thirteen and Ready!\", \"Swappers Convention\" and \"Hung\", the last one published under the name \"Leonard Chris\". They also include contributions to the fanzines \"Energumen\" and \"BeABohema\" in the late 1960s and early 1970s, including articles that mention the erotic novels, such as a movie column called \"Way Station\" in \"BeABohema\".\n\nKoontz has stated on his website that he used only the 10 known pen names and \"there are no secret pen names used by Dean\"; he adds that his own identity was stolen by \"a person he had previously worked with professionally\", who submitted letters and some articles to fanzines under Koontz's name between 1969 and at least the early 1970s. Koontz has stated that he was only made aware of these bogus letters and articles in 1991 in a written admission from the identity thief. He has stated that he will reveal this person's name in his memoirs.\n\n\nUpcoming\n\n\nReleased\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8912", "title": "Drake equation", "text": "Drake equation\n\nThe Drake equation is a probabilistic argument used to arrive at an estimate of the number of active, communicative extraterrestrial civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy.\nThe number of such civilizations , is assumed to be equal to the mathematical product of\n\nfor a combined expression of:\nThe equation was written in 1961 by Frank Drake, not for purposes of quantifying the number of civilizations, but as a way to stimulate scientific dialogue at the first scientific meeting on the search for intelligent extraterrestrial life (SETI).\n\nCriticism related to the Drake equation focuses not on the equation itself, but on the fact that the estimated values for several of its factors are highly conjectural, the combined effect being that the uncertainty associated with any derived value is so large that the equation cannot be used to draw firm conclusions.\n\nIn September 1959, physicists Giuseppe Cocconi and Philip Morrison published an article in the journal \"Nature\" with the provocative title \"Searching for Interstellar Communications.\" \nCocconi and Morrison argued that radio telescopes had become sensitive enough to pick up transmissions that might be broadcast into space by civilizations orbiting other stars. Such messages, they suggested, might be transmitted at a wavelength of 21 cm (1,420.4 MHz). This is the wavelength of radio emission by neutral hydrogen, the most common element in the universe, and they reasoned that other intelligences might see this as a logical landmark in the radio spectrum.\n\nTwo months later, Harvard University astronomy professor Harlow Shapley speculated on the number of inhabited planets in the universe, saying \"The universe has 10 million, million, million suns (10 followed by 18 zeros) similar to our own. One in a million has planets around it. Only one in a million million has the right combination of chemicals, temperature, water, days and nights to support planetary life as we know it. This calculation arrives at the estimated figure of 100 million worlds where life has been forged by evolution.\"\n\nSeven months after Cocconi and Morrison published their article, Drake made the first systematic search for signals from extraterrestrial intelligent beings. Using the 25 m dish of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Green Bank, West Virginia, Drake monitored two nearby Sun-like stars: Epsilon Eridani and Tau Ceti. In this project, which he called Project Ozma, he slowly scanned frequencies close to the 21 cm wavelength for six hours a day from April to July 1960. The project was well designed, inexpensive, and simple by today's standards. It was also unsuccessful.\n\nSoon thereafter, Drake hosted a \"search for extraterrestrial intelligence\" meeting on detecting their radio signals. The meeting was held at the Green Bank facility in 1961. The equation that bears Drake's name arose out of his preparations for the meeting.\n\nThe ten attendees were conference organizer J. Peter Pearman, Frank Drake, Philip Morrison, businessman and radio amateur Dana Atchley, chemist Melvin Calvin, astronomer Su-Shu Huang, neuroscientist John C. Lilly, inventor Barney Oliver, astronomer Carl Sagan and radio-astronomer Otto Struve. These participants dubbed themselves \"The Order of the Dolphin\" (because of Lilly's work on dolphin communication), and commemorated their first meeting with a plaque at the observatory hall.\n\nThe Drake equation is:\n\nwhere:\n\nand\n\nThe Drake equation amounts to a summary of the factors affecting the likelihood that we might detect radio-communication from intelligent extraterrestrial life. The last four parameters, , , , and , are not known and are very hard to estimate, with values ranging over many orders of magnitude (see criticism). Therefore, the usefulness of the Drake equation is not in the solving, but rather in the contemplation of all the various concepts which scientists must incorporate when considering the question of life elsewhere, and gives the question of life elsewhere a basis for scientific analysis. The Drake equation is a statement that stimulates intellectual curiosity about the universe around us, for helping us to understand that life as we know it is the end product of a natural, cosmic evolution, and for helping us realize how much we are a part of that universe. What the equation and the search for life has done is focus science on some of the other questions about life in the universe, specifically abiogenesis, the development of multi-cellular life and the development of intelligence itself.\n\nWithin the limits of our existing technology, any practical search for distant intelligent life must necessarily be a search for some manifestation of a distant technology. After about 50 years, the Drake equation is still of seminal importance because it is a 'road map' of what we need to learn in order to solve this fundamental existential question. It also formed the backbone of astrobiology as a science; although speculation is entertained to give context, astrobiology concerns itself primarily with hypotheses that fit firmly into existing scientific theories. Some 50 years of SETI have failed to find anything, even though radio telescopes, receiver techniques, and computational abilities have improved enormously since the early 1960s, but it has been discovered, at least, that our galaxy is not teeming with very powerful alien transmitters continuously broadcasting near the 21 cm hydrogen frequency. No one could say this in 1961.\n\nAs many observers have pointed out, the Drake equation is a very simple model that does not include potentially relevant parameters, and many changes and modifications to the equation have been proposed. One line of modification, for example, attempts to account for the uncertainty inherent in many of the terms.\n\nOthers note that the Drake equation ignores many concepts that might be relevant to the odds of contacting other civilizations. For example, David Brin states: \"The Drake equation merely speaks of the number of sites at which ETIs spontaneously arise. The equation says nothing directly about the contact cross-section between an ETIS and contemporary human society\". Because it is the contact cross-section that is of interest to the SETI community, many additional factors and modifications of the Drake equation have been proposed.\n\n\n\n\n\nSeager stresses, “We’re not throwing out the Drake Equation, which is really a different topic,” explaining, “Since Drake came up with the equation, we have discovered thousands of exoplanets. We as a community have had our views revolutionized as to what could possibly be out there. And now we have a real question on our hands, one that’s not related to intelligent life: Can we detect any signs of life in any way in the very near future?”\n\nThere is considerable disagreement on the values of these parameters, but the 'educated guesses' used by Drake and his colleagues in 1961 were: \n\nInserting the above minimum numbers into the equation gives a minimum N of 20 (see: Range of results). Inserting the maximum numbers gives a maximum of 50,000,000. Drake states that given the uncertainties, the original meeting concluded that , and there were probably between 1000 and 100,000,000 civilizations in the Milky Way galaxy.\n\nThis section discusses and attempts to list the best current estimates for the parameters of the Drake equation.\nLatest calculations from NASA and the European Space Agency indicate that the current rate of star formation in our galaxy is about of material per year. To get the number of stars per year, this must account for the initial mass function (IMF) for stars, where the average new star mass is about . This gives a star formation rate of about 1.5–3 stars per year.\n\nRecent analysis of microlensing surveys has found that may approach 1—that is, stars are orbited by planets as a rule, rather than the exception; and that there are one or more bound planets per Milky Way star.\n\nIn November 2013, astronomers reported, based on \"Kepler\" space mission data, that there could be as many as 40 billion Earth-sized planets orbiting in the habitable zones of sun-like stars and red dwarf stars within the Milky Way Galaxy. 11 billion of these estimated planets may be orbiting sun-like stars. Since there are about 100 billion stars in the galaxy, this implies is roughly 0.4. The nearest planet in the habitable zone may be as little as 12 light-years away, according to the scientists.\n\nThe consensus at the Green Bank meeting was that had a minimum value between 3 and 5. Dutch astronomer Govert Schilling has opined that this is optimistic. Even if planets are in the habitable zone, the number of planets with the right proportion of elements is difficult to estimate. Brad Gibson, Yeshe Fenner, and Charley Lineweaver determined that about 10% of star systems in the Milky Way galaxy are hospitable to life, by having heavy elements, being far from supernovae and being stable for a sufficient time.\n\nThe discovery of numerous gas giants in close orbit with their stars has introduced doubt that life-supporting planets commonly survive the formation of their stellar systems. So-called hot Jupiters may migrate from distant orbits to near orbits, in the process disrupting the orbits of habitable planets.\n\nOn the other hand, the variety of star systems that might have habitable zones is not just limited to solar-type stars and Earth-sized planets. It is now estimated that even tidally locked planets close to red dwarf stars might have habitable zones, although the flaring behavior of these stars might argue against this. The possibility of life on moons of gas giants (such as Jupiter's moon Europa, or Saturn's moon Titan) adds further uncertainty to this figure.\n\nThe authors of the rare Earth hypothesis propose a number of additional constraints on habitability for planets, including being in galactic zones with suitably low radiation, high star metallicity, and low enough density to avoid excessive asteroid bombardment. They also propose that it is necessary to have a planetary system with large gas giants which provide bombardment protection without a hot Jupiter; and a planet with plate tectonics, a large moon that creates tidal pools, and moderate axial tilt to generate seasonal variation.\n\nGeological evidence from the Earth suggests that may be high; life on Earth appears to have begun around the same time as favorable conditions arose, suggesting that abiogenesis may be relatively common once conditions are right. However, this evidence only looks at the Earth (a single model planet), and contains anthropic bias, as the planet of study was not chosen randomly, but by the living organisms that already inhabit it (ourselves). From a classical hypothesis testing standpoint, there are zero degrees of freedom, permitting no valid estimates to be made. If life were to be found on Mars that developed independently from life on Earth it would imply a value for close to 1. While this would raise the degrees of freedom from zero to one, there would remain a great deal of uncertainty on any estimate due to the small sample size, and the chance they are not really independent.\n\nCountering this argument is that there is no evidence for abiogenesis occurring more than once on the Earth — that is, all terrestrial life stems from a common origin. If abiogenesis were more common it would be speculated to have occurred more than once on the Earth. Scientists have searched for this by looking for bacteria that are unrelated to other life on Earth, but none have been found yet. It is also possible that life arose more than once, but that other branches were out-competed, or died in mass extinctions, or were lost in other ways. Biochemists Francis Crick and Leslie Orgel laid special emphasis on this uncertainty: \"At the moment we have no means at all of knowing\" whether we are \"likely to be alone in the galaxy (Universe)\" or whether \"the galaxy may be pullulating with life of many different forms.\" As an alternative to abiogenesis on Earth, they proposed the hypothesis of directed panspermia, which states that Earth life began with \"microorganisms sent here deliberately by a technological society on another planet, by means of a special long-range unmanned spaceship\".\n\nThis value remains particularly controversial. Those who favor a low value, such as the biologist Ernst Mayr, point out that of the billions of species that have existed on Earth, only one has become intelligent and from this, infer a tiny value for . Likewise, the Rare Earth hypothesis, notwithstanding their low value for above, also think a low value for dominates the analysis. Those who favor higher values note the generally increasing complexity of life over time, concluding that the appearance of intelligence is almost inevitable, implying an approaching 1. Skeptics point out that the large spread of values in this factor and others make all estimates unreliable. (See Criticism).\n\nIn addition, while it appears that life developed soon after the formation of Earth, the Cambrian explosion, in which a large variety of multicellular life forms came into being, occurred a considerable amount of time after the formation of Earth, which suggests the possibility that special conditions were necessary. Some scenarios such as the snowball Earth or research into the extinction events have raised the possibility that life on Earth is relatively fragile. Research on any past life on Mars is relevant since a discovery that life did form on Mars but ceased to exist might raise our estimate of f but would indicate that in half the known cases, intelligent life did not develop.\n\nEstimates of have been affected by discoveries that the Solar System's orbit is circular in the galaxy, at such a distance that it remains out of the spiral arms for tens of millions of years (evading radiation from novae). Also, Earth's large moon may aid the evolution of life by stabilizing the planet's axis of rotation.\n\nFor deliberate communication, the one example we have (the Earth) does not do much explicit communication, though there are some efforts covering only a tiny fraction of the stars that might look for our presence. (See Arecibo message, for example). There is considerable speculation why an extraterrestrial civilization might exist but choose not to communicate. However, deliberate communication is not required, and calculations indicate that current or near-future Earth-level technology might well be detectable to civilizations not too much more advanced than our own. By this standard, the Earth is a communicating civilization.\n\nAnother question is what percentage of civilizations in the galaxy are close enough for us to detect, assuming that they send out signals. For example, existing Earth radio telescopes could only detect Earth radio transmissions from roughly a light year away.\n\nMichael Shermer estimated as 420 years, based on the duration of sixty historical Earthly civilizations. Using 28 civilizations more recent than the Roman Empire, he calculates a figure of 304 years for \"modern\" civilizations. It could also be argued from Michael Shermer's results that the fall of most of these civilizations was followed by later civilizations that carried on the technologies, so it is doubtful that they are separate civilizations in the context of the Drake equation. In the expanded version, including \"reappearance number\", this lack of specificity in defining single civilizations does not matter for the end result, since such a civilization turnover could be described as an increase in the \"reappearance number\" rather than increase in , stating that a civilization reappears in the form of the succeeding cultures. Furthermore, since none could communicate over interstellar space, the method of comparing with historical civilizations could be regarded as invalid.\n\nDavid Grinspoon has argued that once a civilization has developed enough, it might overcome all threats to its survival. It will then last for an indefinite period of time, making the value for potentially billions of years. If this is the case, then he proposes that the Milky Way galaxy may have been steadily accumulating advanced civilizations since it formed. He proposes that the last factor be replaced with , where is the fraction of communicating civilizations become \"immortal\" (in the sense that they simply do not die out), and representing the length of time during which this process has been going on. This has the advantage that would be a relatively easy to discover number, as it would simply be some fraction of the age of the universe.\n\nIt has also been hypothesized that once a civilization has learned of a more advanced one, its longevity could increase because it can learn from the experiences of the other.\n\nThe astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that all of the terms, except for the lifetime of a civilization, are relatively high and the determining factor in whether there are large or small numbers of civilizations in the universe is the civilization lifetime, or in other words, the ability of technological civilizations to avoid self-destruction. In Sagan's case, the Drake equation was a strong motivating factor for his interest in environmental issues and his efforts to warn against the dangers of nuclear warfare.\n\nAs many skeptics have pointed out, the Drake equation can give a very wide range of values, depending on the assumptions, and the values used in portions of the Drake equation are not well-established. In particular, the result can be , meaning we are likely alone in the galaxy, or , implying there are many civilizations we might contact. One of the few points of wide agreement is that the presence of humanity implies a probability of intelligence arising of greater than zero.\n\nAs an example of a low estimate, combining NASA's star formation rates, the rare Earth hypothesis value of , Mayr's view on intelligence arising, Drake's view of communication, and Shermer's estimate of lifetime:\ngives:\ni.e., suggesting that we are probably alone in this galaxy, and possibly the observable universe.\n\nOn the other hand, with larger values for each of the parameters above, values of can be derived that are greater than 1. The following higher values that have been proposed for each of the parameters:\nUse of these parameters gives:\n\nMonte Carlo simulations of estimates of the Drake equation factors based on a stellar and planetary model of the Milky Way have resulted in the number of civilizations varying by a factor of 100.\n\nThe Drake equation can be modified to determine just how unlikely intelligent life must be, to give the result that Earth has the only intelligent life that has ever arisen, either in our galaxy or the universe as a whole. This simplifies the calculation by removing the lifetime and communication constraints. Since star and planets counts are known, this leaves the only unknown as the odds that a habitable planet \"ever\" develops intelligent life. For Earth to have the only civilization that has ever occurred in the universe, then the odds of any habitable planet ever developing such a civilization must be less than . Similarly, for Earth to host the only civilization in our galaxy for all time, the odds of a habitable zone planet ever hosting intelligent life must be less than (about 1 in 60 billion). The figure for the universe implies that it is highly unlikely that Earth hosts the only intelligent life that has ever occurred. The figure for our galaxy suggests that other civilizations may have occurred or will likely occur in our galaxy.\n\nCriticism of the Drake equation follows mostly from the observation that several terms in the equation are largely or entirely based on conjecture. Star formation rates are well-known, and the incidence of planets has a sound theoretical and observational basis, but the other terms in the equation become very speculative. The uncertainties revolve around our understanding of the evolution of life, intelligence, and civilization, not physics. No statistical estimates are possible for some of the parameters, where only one example is known. The net result is that the equation cannot be used to draw firm conclusions of any kind, and the resulting margin of error is huge, far beyond what some consider acceptable or meaningful.\n\nOne reply to such criticisms is that even though the Drake equation currently involves speculation about unmeasured parameters, it was intended as a way to stimulate dialogue on these topics. Then the focus becomes how to proceed experimentally. Indeed, Drake originally formulated the equation merely as an agenda for discussion at the Green Bank conference.\n\nThe pessimists' most telling argument in the SETI debate stems not from theory or conjecture but from an actual observation: the presumed lack of extraterrestrial contact. A civilization lasting for tens of millions of years might be able to travel anywhere in the galaxy, even at the slow speeds foreseeable with our own kind of technology. Furthermore, no confirmed signs of intelligence elsewhere have been recognized as such, either in our galaxy or in the observable universe of 2 trillion galaxies. According to this line of thinking, the tendency to fill up all available territory seems to be a universal trait of living things, so the Earth should have already been colonized, or at least visited, but no evidence of this exists. Hence Fermi's question \"Where is everybody?\".\n\nA large number of explanations have been proposed to explain this lack of contact; a book published in 2015 elaborated on 75 different explanations. In terms of the Drake Equation, the explanations can be divided into three classes:\n\n\nThese lines of reasoning lead to the Great Filter hypothesis, which states that since there are no observed extraterrestrial civilizations, despite the vast number of stars, then some step in the process must be acting as a filter to reduce the final value. According to this view, either it is very hard for intelligent life to arise, or the lifetime of such civilizations, or the period of time they reveal their existence, must be relatively short.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8914", "title": "Damascus", "text": "Damascus\n\nDamascus ( ' , ) is the capital and likely the largest city of Syria, following the decline in population of Aleppo due to the battle for the city. It is commonly known in Syria as \"ash-Sham\" ( ') and nicknamed as the \"City of Jasmine\" ( \"\"). In addition to being one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world, Damascus is a major cultural centre of the Levant and the Arab world. The city has an estimated population of 1,711,000 .\n\nLocated in south-western Syria, Damascus is the centre of a large metropolitan area of 2.6 million people (2004). Geographically embedded on the eastern foothills of the Anti-Lebanon mountain range inland from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean on a plateau above sea level, Damascus experiences a semi-arid climate because of the rain shadow effect. The Barada River flows through Damascus.\n\nFirst settled in the second millennium BC, it was chosen as the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate from 661 to 750. After the victory of the Abbasid dynasty, the seat of Islamic power was moved to Baghdad. Damascus saw a political decline throughout the Abbasid era, only to regain significant importance in the Ayyubid and Mamluk periods. Today, it is the seat of the central government and all of the government ministries.\n\nThe name of Damascus first appeared in the geographical list of Thutmose III as T-m-ś-q in the 15th century BC.\nThe etymology of the ancient name \"T-m-ś-q\" is uncertain. It is attested as ' in Akkadian, ' in Egyptian, ' () in Old Aramaic and \"Dammeśeq\" () in Biblical Hebrew. The Akkadian spelling is found in the Amarna letters, from the 14th century BC. Later Aramaic spellings of the name often include an intrusive \"resh\" (letter \"r\"), perhaps influenced by the root \"dr\", meaning \"dwelling\". Thus, the English and Latin name of the city is \"Damascus\" which was imported from (Greek: ) originated from \"the Qumranic \"Darmeśeq\" (), and \"Darmsûq\" () in Syriac\", meaning \"a well-watered land\". In Arabic, the city is called ' (), although this is often shortened to either \"Dimašq\" or \"aš-Šām\" by the citizens of Damascus, of Syria and other Arab neighbours and Turkey (as \"Şam\"). ' is an Arabic term for \"Levant\" and for \"Syria\"; the latter, and particularly the historical region of Syria, is called ' ( / \"land of the Levant\").\n\nDamascus was built in a strategic site on a plateau above sea level and about inland from the Mediterranean, sheltered by the Anti-Lebanon mountains, supplied with water by the Barada River, and at a crossroads between trade routes: the north-south route connecting Egypt with Asia Minor, and the east-west cross-desert route connecting Lebanon with the Euphrates river valley. The Anti-Lebanon mountains mark the border between Syria and Lebanon. The range has peaks of over 10,000 ft. and blocks precipitation from the Mediterranean sea, so that the region of Damascus is sometimes subject to droughts. However, in ancient times this was mitigated by the Barada River, which originates from mountain streams fed by melting snow. Damascus is surrounded by the Ghouta, irrigated farmland where many vegetables, cereals and fruits have been farmed since ancient times. Maps of Roman Syria indicate that the Barada river emptied into a lake of some size east of Damascus. Today it is called Bahira Atayba, the hesitant lake, because in years of severe drought it does not even exist.\n\nThe modern city has an area of , out of which is urban, while Jabal Qasioun occupies the rest.\nThe old city of Damascus, enclosed by the city walls, lies on the south bank of the river Barada which is almost dry ( left). To the south-east, north and north-east it is surrounded by suburban areas whose history stretches back to the Middle Ages: Midan in the south-west, Sarouja and Imara in the north and north-west. These neighbourhoods originally arose on roads leading out of the city, near the tombs of religious figures. In the 19th century outlying villages developed on the slopes of Jabal Qasioun, overlooking the city, already the site of the al-Salihiyah neighbourhood centred on the important shrine of medieval Andalusian Sheikh and philosopher Ibn Arabi. These new neighbourhoods were initially settled by Kurdish soldiery and Muslim refugees from the European regions of the Ottoman Empire which had fallen under Christian rule. Thus they were known as \"al-Akrad\" \"(the Kurds)\" and \"al-Muhajirin\" \"(the migrants)\". They lay north of the old city.\n\nFrom the late 19th century on, a modern administrative and commercial centre began to spring up to the west of the old city, around the Barada, centred on the area known as \"al-Marjeh\" or \"the meadow\". \"Al-Marjeh\" soon became the name of what was initially the central square of modern Damascus, with the city hall on it. The courts of justice, post office and railway station stood on higher ground slightly to the south. A Europeanised residential quarter soon began to be built on the road leading between al-Marjeh and al-Salihiyah. The commercial and administrative centre of the new city gradually shifted northwards slightly towards this area.\n\nIn the 20th century, newer suburbs developed north of the Barada, and to some extent to the south, invading the Ghouta oasis. In 1956–1957 the new neighbourhood of Yarmouk became a second home to thousands of Palestinian refugees. City planners preferred to preserve the Ghouta as far as possible, and in the later 20th century some of the main areas of development were to the north, in the western Mezzeh neighbourhood and most recently along the Barada valley in Dummar in the north west and on the slopes of the mountains at Berze in the north-east. Poorer areas, often built without official approval, have mostly developed south of the main city.\n\nDamascus used to be surrounded by an oasis, the Ghouta region (الغوطة \"al-ġūṭä\"), watered by the Barada river. The Fijeh spring, west along the Barada valley, used to provide the city with drinking water and various sources to the west are tapped by water contractors. The flow of the Barada has reduced with the rapid expansion of housing and industry in the city and it is almost dry. The lower aquifers are polluted by city's runoff from heavily used roads, industry and sewage.\n\nDamascus has a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") in Köppen-Geiger system, due to the rain shadow effect of the Anti-Lebanon mountains and the prevailing ocean currents. Summers are dry and hot with less humidity. Winters are cool and somewhat rainy; snowfall is infrequent. Annual rainfall is around , occurring from October to May.\n\nCarbon-14 dating at Tell Ramad, on the outskirts of Damascus, suggests that the site may have been occupied since the second half of the seventh millennium BC, possibly around 6300 B C. However, evidence of settlement in the wider Barada basin dating back to 9000 BC exists, although no large-scale settlement was present within Damascus walls until the second millennium BC.\n\nSome of the earliest Egyptian records are from the 1350 BC Amarna letters, when Damascus (called \"Dimasqu\") was ruled by king Biryawaza. The Damascus region, as well as the rest of Syria, became a battleground circa 1260 BC, between the Hittites from the north and the Egyptians from the south, ending with a signed treaty between Hattusili and Ramesses II where the former handed over control of the Damascus area to Ramesses II in 1259 BC. The arrival of the Sea Peoples, around 1200 BC, marked the end of the Bronze Age in the region and brought about new development of warfare. Damascus was only the peripheral part of this picture which mostly affected the larger population centres of ancient Syria. However, these events had contributed to the development of Damascus as a new influential center that emerged with the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age.\n\nDamascus is mentioned in Genesis 14:15 as existing at the time of the War of the Kings. According to the 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus in his twenty-one volume \"Antiquities of the Jews\", Damascus (along with Trachonitis), was founded by Uz, the son of Aram. In Antiquities i. 7, Josephus reports:\n\nNicolaus of Damascus, in the fourth book of his History, says thus: \"Abraham reigned at Damascus, being a foreigner, who came with an army out of the land above Babylon, called the land of the Chaldeans: but, after a long time, he got him up, and removed from that country also, with his people, and went into the land then called the land of Canaan, but now the land of Judea, and this when his posterity were become a multitude; as to which posterity of his, we relate their history in another work. Now the name of Abraham is even still famous in the country of Damascus; and there is shown a village named from him, The Habitation of Abraham.\n\nDamascus is not documented as an important city until the arrival of the Aramaeans, a Semitic people from Mesopotamia, in the 11th century BC. By the start of the first millennium BC, several Aramaic kingdoms were formed, as Aramaeans abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and formed federated tribal states. One of these kingdoms was Aram-Damascus, centred on its capital Damascus. The Aramaeans who entered the city without battle, adopted the name \"Dimashqu\" for their new home. Noticing the agricultural potential of the still-undeveloped and sparsely populated area, they established the water distribution system of Damascus by constructing canals and tunnels which maximized the efficiency of the river Barada. The same network was later improved by the Romans and the Umayyads, and still forms the basis of the water system of the old part of the city today. The Aramaeans initially turned Damascus into an outpost of a loose federation of Aramaean tribes, known as Aram-Zobah, based in the Beqaa Valley.\n\nThe city would gain pre-eminence in southern Syria when Ezron, the claimant to Aram-Zobah's throne who was denied kingship of the federation, fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC. Ezron overthrew the city's tribal governor and founded the independent entity of Aram-Damascus. As this new state expanded south, it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east. Under Ezron's grandson, Ben-Hadad I (880–841 BC), and his successor Hazael, Damascus annexed Bashan (modern-day Hauran region), and went on the offensive with Israel. This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria. As a result, he granted Israel trading rights in Damascus.\n\nAnother possible reason for the treaty between Aram-Damascus and Israel was the common threat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire which was attempting to expand into the Mediterranean coast. In 853 BC, King Hadadezer of Damascus led a Levantine coalition, that included forces from the northern Aram-Hamath kingdom and troops supplied by King Ahab of Israel, in the Battle of Qarqar against the Neo-Assyrian army. Aram-Damascus came out victorious, temporarily preventing the Assyrians from encroaching into Syria. However, after Hadadzezer was killed by his successor, Hazael, the Levantine alliance collapsed. Aram-Damascus attempted to invade Israel, but was interrupted by the renewed Assyrian invasion. Hazael ordered a retreat to the walled part of Damascus while the Assyrians plundered the remainder of the kingdom. Unable to enter the city, they declared their supremacy in the Hauran and Beqa'a valleys.\n\nBy the 8th century BC, Damascus was practically engulfed by the Assyrians and entered a dark age. Nonetheless, it remained the economic and cultural centre of the Near East as well as the Arameaen resistance. In 727, a revolt took place in the city, but was put down by Assyrian forces. After Assyria went on a wide-scale campaign of quelling revolts throughout Syria, Damascus became totally subjugated by their rule. A positive effect of this was stability for the city and benefits from the spice and incense trade with Arabia. However, Assyrian authority was dwindling by 609–605 BC, and Syria-Palestine was falling into the orbit of Pharaoh Necho II's Egypt. In 572 BC, all of Syria had been conquered by the Neo-Babylonians, but the status of Damascus under Babylon is relatively unknown.\n\nDamascus was conquered by Alexander the Great. After the death of Alexander in 323 BC, Damascus became the site of a struggle between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic empires. The control of the city passed frequently from one empire to the other. Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals, made Antioch the capital of his vast empire, which led to the decline of Damascus' importance compared with new Seleucid cities such as Latakia in the north. Later, Demetrius III Philopator rebuilt the city according to the Greek hippodamian system and renamed it \"Demetrias\".\nIn 64 BC, the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria. The Romans occupied Damascus and subsequently incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis which themselves were incorporated into the province of Syria and granted autonomy.\n\nThe city of Damascus was entirely redesigned by the Romans after Pompey conquered the region. Still today the Old Town of Damascus retains the rectangular shape of the Roman city, with its two main axes: the Decumanus Maximus (east-west; known today as the \"Via Recta\") and the Cardo (north-south), the Decumanus being about twice as long. The Romans built a monumental gate which still survives at the eastern end of Decumanus Maximus. The gate originally had three arches: the central arch was for chariots while the side arches were for pedestrians.\nIn 23 BC Herod the Great was gifted lands controlled by Zenodorus by Caesar Augustus and some scholars believe that Herod was also granted control of Damascus as well. The control of Damascus reverted to Syria either upon the death of Herod the Great or was part of the lands given to Herod Philip which were given to Syria with his death in 33/34 AD.\n\nSome scholars suggest that control of Damascus was gained by Aretas IV Philopatris of Nabatea between the death of Herod Philip in 33/34 AD and the death of Aretas in 40 AD but there is substantial evidence against Aretas controlling the city before 37 AD and many reasons why it could not have been a gift from Caligula between 37 and 40 AD. In fact, all these theories stem not from any actual evidence outside the New Testament but rather \"a certain understanding of 2 Cor. 11:32\" and in reality \"neither from archaeological evidence, secular-historical sources, nor New Testament texts can Nabatean sovereignty over Damascus in the first century AD be proven.\"\n\nDamascus became a metropolis by the beginning of the 2nd century and in 222 it was upgraded to a \"colonia\" by the Emperor Septimius Severus. During the \"Pax Romana\", Damascus and the Roman province of Syria in general began to prosper. Damascus's importance as a caravan city was evident with the trade routes from southern Arabia, Palmyra, Petra, and the silk routes from China all converging on it. The city satisfied the Roman demands for eastern luxuries. Circa 125 CE the Roman emperor Hadrian promoted the city of Damascus to \"Metropolis of Coele-Syria\".\n\nLittle remains of the architecture of the Romans, but the town planning of the old city did have a lasting effect. The Roman architects brought together the Greek and Aramaean foundations of the city and fused them into a new layout measuring approximately , surrounded by a city wall. The city wall contained seven gates, but only the eastern gate (Bab Sharqi) remains from the Roman period. Roman Damascus lies mostly at depths of up to five meters (16.4 ft) below the modern city.\n\nThe old borough of Bab Tuma was developed at the end of the Roman/Byzantine era by the local Eastern Orthodox community. According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Thomas both lived in that neighbourhood. Roman Catholic historians also consider Bab Tuma to be the birthplace of several Popes such as John V and Gregory III.\n\nMuhammad's first indirect interaction with the people of Damascus was when he sent Shiya bin Wahab to Haris bin Ghasanni, the king of Damascus. In his letter, Muhammad stated: \"Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Be informed that my religion shall prevail everywhere. You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command shall remain yours.\"\nAfter most of the Syrian countryside was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate during the reign of Caliph Umar, Damascus itself was conquered by the Muslim-Arab general Khalid ibn al-Walid in August - September 634 AD. His army had previously attempted to capture the city in April 634, but without success. With Damascus now in Muslim-Arab hands, the Byzantines, alarmed at the loss of their most prestigious city in the Near East, had decided to wrest back control of it. Under Emperor Heraclius, the Byzantines fielded an army superior to that of the Rashidun in manpower. They advanced into southern Syria during the spring of 636 and consequently Khalid ibn al-Walid's forces withdrew from Damascus to prepare for renewed confrontation. In August, the two sides met along the Yarmouk River where they a fought a major battle which ended in a decisive Muslim victory, solidifying Muslim rule in Syria and Palestine.\n\nWhile the Muslims administered the city, the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian—Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite—with a growing community of Muslims from Mecca, Medina, and the Syrian Desert. The governor assigned to the city which had been chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria was Mu'awiya I. After the death of Caliph Ali in 661, Mu'awiya was chosen as the caliph of the expanding Islamic empire. Because of the vast amounts of assets his clan, the Umayyads, owned in the city and because of its traditional economic and social links with the Hijaz as well as the Christian Arab tribes of the region, Mu'awiya established Damascus as the capital of the entire Caliphate. With the ascension of Caliph Abd al-Malik in 685, an Islamic coinage system was introduced and all of the surplus revenue of the Caliphate's provinces were forwarded to the treasury of Damascus. Arabic was also established as the official language, giving the Muslim minority of the city an advantage over the Aramaic-speaking Christians in administrative affairs. It is critical to note that, at the time Damascus was conquered by the Muslims, the majority of Arabs were either pagans or Christians. Damascus itself was predominantly Aramaic with Arab speaking people.\n\nAbd al-Malik's successor, al-Walid initiated construction of the Grand Mosque of Damascus (known as the Umayyad Mosque) in 706. The site originally had been the Christian Cathedral of St. John and the Muslims maintained the building's dedication to John the Baptist. By 715, the mosque was complete. Al-Walid died that same year and he was succeeded at first by Suleiman ibn Abd al-Malik and then by Umar II, who each ruled for brief periods before the reign of Hisham in 724. With these successions, the status of Damascus was gradually weakening as Suleiman had chosen Ramla as his residence and later Hisham chose Resafa. Following the murder of the latter in 743, the Caliphate of the Umayyads—which by then stretched from Spain to India— was crumbling as a result of widespread revolts. During the reign of Marwan II in 744, the capital of the empire was relocated to Harran in the northern Jazira region.\n\nOn 25 August 750, the Abbasids, having already beaten the Umayyads in the Battle of the Zab in Iraq, conquered Damascus after facing little resistance. With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate, Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad, the new Islamic capital. Within the first six months of Abbasid rule, revolts began erupting in the city, albeit too isolated and unfocused to present a viable threat. Nonetheless, the last of the prominent Umayyads were executed, the traditional officials of Damascus ostracised, and army generals from the city were dismissed. Afterwards, the Umayyad family cemetery was desecrated and the city walls were torn down, reducing Damascus into a provincial town of little importance. It roughly disappeared from written records for the next century and the only significant improvement of the city was the Abbasid-built treasury dome in the Umayyad Mosque in 789. In 811, distant remnants of the Umayyad dynasty staged a strong uprising in Damascus that was eventually put down.\n\nAhmad ibn Tulun, a dissenting Turkish governor appointed by the Abbasids, conquered Syria, including Damascus, from his overlords in 878-79. In an act of respect for the previous Umayyad rulers, he erected a shrine on the site of Mu'awiya's grave in the city. Tulunid rule of Damascus was brief, lasting only until 906 before being replaced by the Qarmatians who were adherents of Shia Islam. Due to their inability to control the vast amount of land they occupied, the Qarmatians withdrew from Damascus and a new dynasty, the Ikhshidids, took control of the city. They maintained the independence of Damascus from the Arab Hamdanid dynasty of Aleppo and the Baghdad-based Abbasids until 967. A period of instability in the city followed, with a Qarmatian raid in 968, a Byzantine raid in 970, and increasing pressures from the Fatimids in the south and the Hamdanids in the north.\n\nThe Shia Fatimids gained control in 970, inflaming hostilities between them and the Sunni Arabs of the city who frequently revolted. A Turk, Alptakin drove out the Fatimids five years later, and through diplomacy, prevented the Byzantines from attempting to annex the city. However, by 977, the Fatimids under Caliph al-Aziz, wrested back control of the city and tamed Sunni dissidents. The Arab geographer, al-Muqaddasi, visited Damascus in 985, remarking that the architecture and infrastructure of the city was \"magnificent\", but living conditions were awful. Under al-Aziz, the city saw a brief period of stability that ended with the reign of al-Hakim (996–1021). In 998, hundreds of Damascus' citizens were rounded up and executed by him for incitement. Three years after al-Hakim's mysterious disappearance, the Arab tribes of southern Syria formed an alliance to stage a massive rebellion against the Fatimids, but they were crushed by the Fatimid Turkish governor of Syria and Palestine, Anushtakin al-Duzbari, in 1029. This victory gave the latter mastery over Syria, displeasing his Fatimid overlords, but gaining the admiration of Damascus' citizens. He was exiled by Fatimid authorities to Aleppo where he died in 1041. From that date to 1063, there are no known records of the city's history. By then, Damascus lacked a city administration, had an enfeebled economy, and a greatly reduced population.\n\nWith the arrival of the Seljuq Turks in the late 11th century, Damascus again became the capital of independent states. It was ruled by Abu Sa'id Taj ad-Dawla Tutush I starting in 1079 and he was succeeded by his son Abu Nasr Duqaq in 1095. The Seljuqs established a court in Damascus and a systematic reversal of Shia inroads in the city. The city also saw an expansion of religious life through private endowments financing religious institutions (\"madrasas\") and hospitals (\"maristans\"). Damascus soon became one of the most important centres of propagating Islamic thought in the Muslim world. After Duqaq's death in 1104, his mentor (\"atabeg\"), Toghtekin, took control of Damascus and the Burid line of the Seljuq dynasty. Under Duqaq and Toghtekin, Damascus experienced stability, elevated status and a revived role in commerce. In addition, the city's Sunni majority enjoyed being a part of the larger Sunni framework effectively governed by various Turkic dynasties who in turn were under the moral authority of the Baghdad-based Abbasids.\n\nWhile the rulers of Damascus were preoccupied in conflict with their fellow Seljuqs in Aleppo and Diyarbakir, the Crusaders, who arrived in the Levant in 1097, conquered Jerusalem, Mount Lebanon and Palestine. Duqaq seemed to have been content with Crusader rule as a buffer between his dominion and the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt. Toghtekin, however, saw the Western invaders as a viable threat to Damascus which, at the time, nominally included Homs, the Beqaa Valley, Hauran, and the Golan Heights a part of its territories. With military support from Sharaf al-Din Mawdud of Mosul, Toghtekin managed to halt Crusader raids in the Golan and Hauran. Mawdud was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque in 1109, depriving Damascus of northern Muslim backing and forcing Toghtekin to agree to a truce with the Crusaders in 1110.\n\nFollowing Tughtakin's death in 1128, his son, Taj al-Din Buri, became the nominal ruler of Damascus. Coincidentally, the Seljuq prince of Mosul, Imad al-Din Zengi, took power in Aleppo and gained a mandate from the Abbasids to extend his authority to Damascus. In 1129, around 6,000 Isma'ili Muslims were killed in the city along with their leaders. The Sunnis were provoked by rumors alleging there was a plot by the Isma'ilis, who controlled the strategic fort at Banias, to aid the Crusaders in capturing Damascus in return for control of Tyre. Soon after the massacre, the Crusaders aimed to take advantage of the unstable situation and launch an assault against Damascus with nearly 60,000 troops. However, Buri allied with Zengi and managed to prevent their army from reaching the city. Buri was assassinated by Isma'ili agents in 1132; he was succeeded by his son, Shams al-Mulk Isma'il who ruled tyrannically until he himself was murdered in 1135 on secret orders from his mother, Safwat al-Mulk Zumurrud; Isma'il's brother, Shihab al-Din Mahmud, replaced him. Meanwhile, Zengi, intent on putting Damascus under his control, married Safwat al-Mulk in 1138. Mahmud's reign then ended in 1139 after he was killed for relatively unknown reasons by members of his family. Mu'in al-Din Unur, his \"mamluk\" (\"slave soldier\") took effective power of the city, prompting Zengi—with Safwat al-Mulk's backing—to lay siege against Damascus the same year. In response, Damascus allied with the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem to resist Zengi's forces. Consequently, Zengi withdrew his army and focused on campaigns against northern Syria.\n\nIn 1144 Zengi conquered Edessa, a crusader stronghold, which led to a new crusade from Europe in 1148. In the meantime Zengi was assassinated and his territory was divided among his sons, one of whom, Nur ad-Din, emir of Aleppo, made an alliance with Damascus. When the European crusaders arrived, they and the nobles of Jerusalem agreed to attack Damascus. Their siege, however, was a complete failure. When the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls, and were driven back. By 1154, Damascus was firmly under Nur ad-Din's control.\n\nIn 1164, King Amalric of Jerusalem invaded Fatimid Egypt, which requested help from Nur ad-Din. The Nur ad-Din sent his general Shirkuh, and in 1166 Amalric was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein. When Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin, who defeated a joint crusader-Byzantine siege of Damietta. Saladin eventually overthrew the Fatimid caliphs and established himself as Sultan of Egypt. He also began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to begin exerting control over Damascus and Nur ad-Din's other Syrian possessions. In 1177 Saladin was defeated by the crusaders at the Battle of Montgisard, despite his numerical superiority. Saladin also besieged Kerak in 1183, but was forced to withdraw. He finally launched a full invasion of Jerusalem in 1187, and annihilated the crusader army at the Battle of Hattin in July. Acre fell to Saladin soon after, and Jerusalem itself was captured in October. These events shocked Europe, resulting in the Third Crusade in 1189, led by Richard I of England, Philip II of France and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, though the last drowned en route.\n\nThe surviving crusaders, joined by new arrivals from Europe, put Acre to a lengthy siege which lasted until 1191. After re-capturing Acre, Richard defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf in 1191 and the Battle of Jaffa in 1192, recovering most of the coast for the Christians, but could not recover Jerusalem or any of the inland territory of the kingdom. The crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192. Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the crusaders to fulfil their vows, after which they all returned home. The native crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.\n\nSaladin died in 1193, and there were frequent conflicts between different Ayyubid sultans ruling in Damascus and Cairo. Damascus was the capital of independent Ayyubid rulers between 1193 and 1201, from 1218 to 1238, from 1239 to 1245, and from 1250 to 1260. At other times it was ruled by the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt. The patterned Byzantine and Chinese silks available through Damascus, one of the Western termini of the Silk Road, gave the English language \"damask\".\n\nAyyubid rule (and independence) came to an end with the Mongol invasion of Syria in 1260, and following the Mongol defeat at Ain Jalut in the same year, Damascus became a provincial capital of the Mamluk Empire, ruled from Egypt, following the Mongol withdrawal. The Black Death of 1348–1349 killed as much as half of the city's population.\n\nIn 1400 Timur, the Turco-Mongol conqueror, besieged Damascus. The Mamluk sultan dispatched a deputation from Cairo, including Ibn Khaldun, who negotiated with him, but after their withdrawal he put the city to sack. The Umayyad Mosque was burnt and men and women taken into slavery. A huge number of the city's artisans were taken to Timur's capital at Samarkand. These were the luckier citizens: many were slaughtered and their heads piled up in a field outside the north-east corner of the walls, where a city square still bears the name \"burj al-ru'us\", originally \"the tower of heads\".\n\nRebuilt, Damascus continued to serve as a Mamluk provincial capital until 1516.\n\nIn early 1516, the Ottoman Turks, wary of the danger of an alliance between the Mamluks and the Persian Safavids, started a campaign of conquest against the Mamluk sultanate. On 21 September, the Mamluk governor of Damascus fled the city, and on 2 October the khutba in the Umayyad mosque was pronounced in the name of Selim I. The day after, the victorious sultan entered the city, staying for three months. On 15 December, he left Damascus by Bab al-Jabiya, intent on the conquest of Egypt. Little appeared to have changed in the city: one army had simply replaced another. However, on his return in October 1517, the sultan ordered the construction of a mosque, tekkiye and mausoleum at the shrine of Shaikh Muhi al-Din ibn Arabi in al-Salihiyah. This was to be the first of Damascus' great Ottoman monuments.\nDuring this time, according to an Ottoman census, Damascus had 10,423 households.\n\nThe Ottomans remained for the next 400 years, except for a brief occupation by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt from 1832 to 1840. Because of its importance as the point of departure for one of the two great Hajj caravans to Mecca, Damascus was treated with more attention by the Porte than its size might have warranted—for most of this period, Aleppo was more populous and commercially more important. In 1560 the Tekkiye al-Sulaimaniyah, a mosque and khan for pilgrims on the road to Mecca, was completed to a design by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, and soon afterwards a madrasa was built adjoining it.\n\nUnder Ottoman rule, Christians and Jews were considered dhimmis and were allowed to practice their religious precepts. During the Damascus affair of 1840 the false accusation of ritual murder was brought against members of the Jewish community of Damascus. In addition the massacre of Christians in 1860 was also one of the most notorious incidents of these centuries, when fighting between Druze and Maronites in Mount Lebanon spilled over into the city. Several thousand Christians were killed, with many more being saved through the intervention of the Algerian exile Abd al-Qadir and his soldiers (three days after the massacre started), who brought them to safety in Abd al-Qadir's residence and the citadel. The Christian quarter of the old city (mostly inhabited by Catholics), including a number of churches, was burnt down. The Christian inhabitants of the notoriously poor and refractory Midan district outside the walls (mostly Orthodox) were, however, protected by their Muslim neighbours.\n\nAmerican Missionary E.C. Miller records that in 1867 the population of the city was 'about' 140,000, of whom 30,000 were Christians, 10,000 Jews and 100,000 'Mohammedans' with fewer than 100 Protestant Christians.\n\nIn the early years of the 20th century, nationalist sentiment in Damascus, initially cultural in its interest, began to take a political colouring, largely in reaction to the turkicisation programme of the Committee of Union and Progress government established in Istanbul in 1908. The hanging of a number of patriotic intellectuals by Jamal Pasha, governor of Damascus, in Beirut and Damascus in 1915 and 1916 further stoked nationalist feeling, and in 1918, as the forces of the Arab Revolt and the British Imperial forces approached, residents fired on the retreating Turkish troops.\nOn 1 October 1918, T. E. Lawrence entered Damascus, the third arrival of the day, the first being the Australian 3rd Light Horse Brigade, led by Major A.C.N. 'Harry' Olden. Two days later, 3 October 1918, the forces of the Arab revolt led by Prince Faysal also entered Damascus. A military government under Shukri Pasha was named and Faisal ibn Hussein was proclaimed king of Syria. Political tension rose in November 1917, when the new Bolshevik government in Russia revealed the Sykes-Picot Agreement whereby Britain and France had arranged to partition the Arab east between them. A new Franco-British proclamation on 17 November promised the \"complete and definitive freeing of the peoples so long oppressed by the Turks.\" The Syrian National Congress in March adopted a democratic constitution. However, the Versailles Conference had granted France a mandate over Syria, and in 1920 a French army commanded by the General Mariano Goybet crossed the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, defeated a small Syrian defensive expedition at the Battle of Maysalun and entered Damascus. The French made Damascus capital of their League of Nations Mandate for Syria.\n\nWhen in 1925 the Great Syrian Revolt in the Hauran spread to Damascus, the French suppressed with heavy weaponry, bombing and shelling the city on 9 May 1926. As a result, the area of the old city between Al-Hamidiyah Souq and Medhat Pasha Souq was burned to the ground, with many deaths, and has since then been known as \"al-Hariqa\" (\"the fire\"). The old city was surrounded with barbed wire to prevent rebels infiltrating from the Ghouta, and a new road was built outside the northern ramparts to facilitate the movement of armored cars.\n\nOn 21 June 1941, 3 weeks into the Allied Syria-Lebanon campaign, Damascus was captured from the Vichy French forces by a mixed British Indian and Free French force. The French agreed to withdraw in 1946, thus leading to the full independence of Syria. Damascus remained the capital.\n\nThe uprising started with peaceful protests in the spring of 2011 and grew into a civil war over the course of the next year.\nOn 6 January 2012, a car bomb exploded in Damascus, killing more than 26 people, most of them civilians. State media said it was a suicide attack and blamed Islamic terrorists.\nIn January 2012, clashes between the regular army and rebels reached the outskirts of Damascus, reportedly preventing people from leaving or reaching their houses, especially when security operations there intensified from the end of January into February.\n\nOn 17 March 2012, twin car bombs hit the heart of the city, targeting the Air Force Intelligence Service and the headquarters of the Security Forces, killing at least 27 people, most of them civilians. An Islamic Jihadi faction called \"Jabhat al-Nusra\" claimed responsibility for the bomb attacks. In the early morning of 19 March, firefights and explosions broke out in the West Villas section of the heavily guarded and upscale Mezzeh neighborhood.\n\nBy June 2012, bullets and shrapnel shells smashed into homes in Damascus overnight as troops battled the Free Syrian Army in the streets. At least three tank shells slammed into residential areas in the central Damascus neighborhood of Qaboun, according to activists. Intense exchanges of assault-rifle fire marked the clash, according to residents and amateur video posted online.\n\nThe historical role that Damascus played as an important trade center has changed in recent years due to political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade. Most goods produced in Damascus, as well as in Syria, are distributed to countries of the Arabian peninsula. Damascus has also held an annual international trade exposition every fall, since 1955.\n\nThe tourism industry in Damascus has a lot of potential, however the current civil war has hampered these prospects. The abundance of cultural wealth in Damascus has been modestly employed since the late 1980s with the development of many accommodation and transportation establishments and other related investments. Since the early 2000s, numerous boutique hotels and bustling cafes opened in the old city which attract plenty of European tourists and Damascenes alike. \nIn 2009 new office space was built and became available on the real estate market. The real-estate sector is stopped due to the terrorism and exodus of the population. \nDamascus is home to a wide range of industrial activity, such as textile, food processing, cement and various chemical industries. The majority of factories are run by the state, however limited privatization in addition to economic activities led by the private sector, were permitted starting in the early 2000s with the liberalization of trade that took place.\nTraditional handcrafts and artisan copper engravings are still produced in the old city.\n\nThe Damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in March 2009, and the exchange is the only stock exchange in Syria. It is currently located in the Barzeh district, within Syria's financial markets and securities commission. Its final home is to be the upmarket business district of Yaafur.\n\nThe estimated population of Damascus in 2011 was 1,711,000. Damascus is the centre of an over-crowded metropolitan area with an estimated population of 5 million. The metropolitan area of Damascus includes the cities of Douma, Harasta, Darayya, Al-Tall and Jaramana.\n\nThe majority of the population in Damascus came as a result of rural-urban migration. \n\nThe vast majority of Damascenes are Syrian Arabs. The Kurds are the largest ethnic minority, with a population of approximately 300,000. They reside primarily in the neighborhoods of Wadi al-Mashari (\"Zorava\" or \"Zore Afa\" in Kurdish) and Rukn al-Din. Other minorities include Armenians, Arameans, Circassians and a small Greek community.\n\nIslam is the dominant religion. The majority of Muslims are Sunni while Alawites and Twelver Shi'a comprise sizeable minorities. Alawites live primarily in the Mezzeh districts of Mezzeh 86 and Sumariyah. Twelvers primarily live near the Shia holy sites of Sayyidah Ruqayya and Sayyidah Zaynab. It is believed that there are more than 200 mosques in Damascus, the most well-known being the Umayyad Mosque. Christians represent about 15%–20% of the population. Several Eastern Christian rites\nhave their headquarters in Damascus. The Christian districts in the city are Bab Tuma, Qassaa and Ghassani. Each have many churches, most notably the ancient Chapel of Saint Paul. At the suburb Soufanieh a series of apparitions of the Virgin Mary have reportedly been observed between 1982 and 2004. A smaller Druze minority inhabits the city, notably in the mixed Christian-Druze suburbs of Tadamon, Jaramana, and Sahnaya. The Supreme Church of Syrian Orthodox is based in Damascus, Bab Toma. This church is independent of the Middle Eastern-based Syriac Orthodox Church in Damascus and has its own leadership and structure in India, although both practice the same or similar denomination of Christianity. There are 700,000 Syriac Orthodox members in Syria.\nThere was a small Jewish community namely in what is called \"Haret al-Yahud\" the Jewish quarter. They are the remnants of an ancient and much larger Jewish presence in Syria, dating back at least to Roman times, if not before to the time of King David.\n\nSufism throughout the second half of the 20th century has been an influential current in the Sunni religious practises, particularly in Damascus. The largest women-only and girls-only Muslim movement in the world happens to be Sufi-oriented and is based in Damascus, led by Munira al-Qubaysi. Syrian Sufism has its stronghold in urban regions such as Damascus, where it also established political movements such as Zayd, with the help of a series of mosques, and clergy such as Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi, Sa'id Hawwa, Abd al-Rahman al-Shaghouri and Muhammad al-Yaqoubi.\n\nDamascus has a wealth of historical sites dating back to many different periods of the city's history. Since the city has been built up with every passing occupation, it has become almost impossible to excavate all the ruins of Damascus that lie up to below the modern level. The Citadel of Damascus is located in the northwest corner of the Old City. The \"Damascus Straight Street\" (referred to in the conversion of St. Paul in Acts 9:11), also known as the \"Via Recta\", was the decumanus (East-West main street) of Roman Damascus, and extended for over . Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate). Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk. At the end of the Bab Sharqi street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam. A shrine in the mosque is said to contain the body of St. John the Baptist. The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque. Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque, the shrine of the youngest daughter of Husayn ibn Ali, can also be found near the Umayyad Mosque. The ancient district of Amara is also within a walking distance from these sites. Another heavily visited site is Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque, where the tomb of Zaynab bint Ali is located.\n\nShias, Fatemids and Dawoodi Bohras believe that after the battle of Karbala (680 AD), in Iraq, the Umayyad caliph Yezid brought Imam Husain's head to Damascus, where it was first kept in the courtyard of Yezid Mahal, now part of Umayyad Mosque complex. All other remaining members of Imam Husain's family (left alive after Karbala) along with heads of all other companions, who were killed at Karbala, were also brought to Damascus. These members were kept as prisoners on the outskirts of the city (near Bab al-Saghir), where the other heads were kept at the same location, now called \"Raous-us-sohda-e-karbala\", visited by all Shias. There is a qibla (place of worship) marked at the place, where Imam Ali-Zain-ul-Abedin used to pray while in captivity.\n\nThe Harat Al Yehud or Jewish Quarter is a recently restored historical tourist destination popular among Europeans before the outbreak of civil war. Vacationers can enjoy the neighborhood and scenic ancient homes abandoned by the completely departed Syrian Jewish community.\n\nThe Old City of Damascus with an approximate area of 128 hectares is surrounded by ramparts on the northern and eastern sides and part of the southern side. There are seven extant city gates, the oldest of which dates back to the Roman period. These are, clockwise from the north of the citadel:\n\nOther areas outside the walled city also bear the name \"gate\": Bab al-Faraj, Bab Mousalla and Bab Sreija, both to the south-west of the walled city.\n\n\n\n\n\n\nDue to the rapid decline of the population of Old Damascus (between 1995 and 2009 about 30,000 people moved out of the old city for more modern accommodation), a growing number of buildings are being abandoned or are falling into disrepair. In March 2007, the local government announced that it would be demolishing Old City buildings along a stretch of rampart walls as part of a redevelopment scheme. These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world. It is hoped that its inclusion on the list will draw more public awareness to these significant threats to the future of the historic Old City of Damascus.\n\nIn spite of the recommendations of the UNESCO World Heritage Center:\n\nIn October 2010, Global Heritage Fund named Damascus one of 12 cultural heritage sites most \"on the verge\" of irreparable loss and destruction.\n\nDamascus is the main center of education in Syria. It is home to Damascus University, which is the oldest and largest university in Syria. After the enactment of legislation allowing private higher institutions, several new universities were established in the city and in the surrounding area, including:\nThe institutes play an important rule in the education, including:\n\nThe main airport is Damascus International Airport, approximately away from the city, with connections to a few Middle Eastern cities. Before the beginning of the Syrian civil war, the Airport had connectivity to many Asian, European, African, and, South American cities.\nStreets in Damascus are often narrow, especially in the older parts of the city, and speed bumps are widely used to limit the speed of vehicles.\n\nPublic transport in Damascus depends extensively on minibuses. There are about one hundred lines that operate inside the city and some of them extend from the city center to nearby suburbs. There is no schedule for the lines, and due to the limited number of official bus stops, buses will usually stop wherever a passenger needs to get on or off. The number of buses serving the same line is relatively high, which minimizes the waiting time. Lines are not numbered, rather they are given captions mostly indicating the two end points and possibly an important station along the line and Taxicab.\n\nServed by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the former main railway station of Damascus was al-Hejaz railway station, about west of the old city. The station is now defunct and the tracks have been removed, but there still is a ticket counter and a shuttle to Damacus Kadam station in the south of the city, which now functions as the main railway station.\n\nIn 2008, the government announced a plan to construct a Damascus Metro with opening time for the green line scheduled for 2015. The green line will be an essential West-East axis for the future public transportation network, serving Moadamiyeh, Sumariyeh, Mezzeh, Damascus University, Hijaz, the Old City, Abbassiyeen and Qaboun Pullman bus station. A four-line metro network is expected be in operation by 2050.\n\nDamascus was chosen as the 2008 Arab Capital of Culture. The preparation for the festivity began in February 2007 with the establishing of the Administrative Committee for \"Damascus Arab Capital of Culture\" by a presidential decree.\n\n\nPopular sports include football, basketball, swimming, tennis, table tennis, equestrian and chess. Damascus is home to many football clubs that participate in the Syrian Premier League including Al-Jaish, Al-Shurta, Al-Wahda and Al-Majd. Many Other sport clubs are located in several districts of the city: Barada SC, Qasioun SC, Nidal SC, Al-Muhafaza, Al-Fayhaa SC, Al-Thawra SC, Dummar SC and Al-Arin SC.\n\nThe fifth and the seventh Pan Arab Games were held in Damascus in 1976 and 1992 respectively.\n\nDamascus has quite busy midnights. Coffeehouses, where —in addition to Arabic coffee and tea— nargileh (water pipes) are served, proliferate Damascus. Card games, tables (backgammon variants), and chess are activities frequented in cafés. Current movies can be seen at Cinema City which was previously known as Cinema Dimashq.\n\nTishreen Park is one of the largest and popular parks in Damascus. It is home to the annual Damascus Flower Show. Other parks include: al-Jahiz, al-Sibbki, al-Tijara, al-Wahda, etc. Damascus' Ghouta (Oasis) is also a popular weekend-destination for recreation. Many recreation centres operate in the city including sport clubs, swimming pools and golf courses. The Syrian Arab Horse Association in Damascus offers a wide range of activities and services for horse breeders and riders.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8921", "title": "Diplomatic immunity", "text": "Diplomatic immunity\n\nDiplomatic immunity is a form of legal immunity that ensures diplomats are given safe passage and are considered not susceptible to lawsuit or prosecution under the host country's laws, but they can still be expelled. Modern diplomatic immunity was codified as international law in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (1961) which has been ratified by all but a handful of nations, though the concept and custom of such immunity have a much longer history dating back thousands of years. Many principles of diplomatic immunity are now considered to be customary law. Diplomatic immunity as an institution developed to allow for the maintenance of government relations, including during periods of difficulties and armed conflict. When receiving diplomats, who formally represent the sovereign, the receiving head of state grants certain privileges and immunities to ensure they may effectively carry out their duties, on the understanding that these are provided on a reciprocal basis.\n\nOriginally, these privileges and immunities were granted on a bilateral, ad hoc basis, which led to misunderstandings and conflict, pressure on weaker states, and an inability for other states to judge which party was at fault. An international agreement known as the Vienna Convention codified the rules and agreements, providing standards and privileges to all states.\n\nIt is possible for the official's home country to waive immunity; this tends to happen only when the individual has committed a serious crime, unconnected with their diplomatic role (as opposed to, say, allegations of spying), or has witnessed such a crime. However, many countries refuse to waive immunity as a matter of course; individuals have no authority to waive their own immunity (except perhaps in cases of defection). Alternatively, the home country may prosecute the individual. If immunity is waived by a government so that a diplomat (or their family members) can be prosecuted, it must be because there is a case to answer and it is in the public interest to prosecute them. For instance, in 2002, a Colombian diplomat in London was prosecuted for manslaughter, once diplomatic immunity was waived by the Colombian government.\n\nThe concept of diplomatic immunity can be found in ancient Indian epics like \"Ramayana\" (between 3000 and 2000 BC) (traditional Hindu dating: over 100,000 years ago) and \"Mahabharata\" (around 4th century BC; traditional Hindu dating: 3000 BC), where messengers and diplomats were given immunity from capital punishment. In Ramayana, when the demon king Ravana ordered the killing of Hanuman, Ravana's younger brother Vibhishana pointed out that messengers or diplomats should not be killed, as per ancient practices.\n\nDuring the evolution of international justice, many wars were considered rebellions or unlawful by one or more combatant sides. In such cases, the servants of the \"criminal\" sovereign were often considered accomplices and their persons violated. In other circumstances, harbingers of inconsiderable demands were killed as a declaration of war. Herodotus records that when heralds of the Persian king Xerxes demanded \"earth and water\" (i.e., symbols of submission) of Greek cities, the Athenians threw them into a pit and the Spartans threw them down a well for the purpose of suggesting they would find both earth and water at the bottom, these often being mentioned by the messenger as a threat of siege. However, even for Herodotus, this maltreatment of envoys is a crime, and he immediately recounts a story of divine vengeance befalling Sparta for this deed.\n\nA Roman envoy was urinated on as he was leaving the city of Tarentum. The oath of the envoy, \"This stain will be washed away with blood!\", was fulfilled during the Second Punic War. The arrest and ill-treatment of the envoy of Raja Raja Chola by the king of Kulasekhara dynasty (Second Cheras), which is now part of modern India, led to the naval Kandalur War in AD 994.\n\nThe Islamic Prophet Muhammad sent and received envoys and strictly forbade harming them. This practice was continued by the Rashidun caliphs who exchanged diplomats with the Ethiopians and the Byzantines. This diplomatic exchange continued during the Arab–Byzantine wars.\n\nClassical Sharia called for hospitality to be shown towards anyone who has been granted \"amān\" (or right of safe passage). \"Amān\" was readily granted to any emissary bearing a letter or another sealed document. The duration of the \"amān\" was typically a year. Envoys with this right of passage were given immunity of person and property. They were exempt from taxation, as long as they didn't engage in trade.\n\nAs diplomats by definition enter the country under safe-conduct, violating them is normally viewed as a great breach of honor, although there have been numerous cases in which diplomats have been killed. Genghis Khan and the Mongols were well known for strongly insisting on the rights of diplomats, and they would often take terrifying vengeance against any state that violated these rights. The Mongols would often raze entire cities in retaliation for the execution of their ambassadors, and invaded and destroyed the Khwarezmid Empire after their ambassadors had been mistreated.\n\nThe British Parliament first guaranteed diplomatic immunity to foreign ambassadors in 1709, after Count Andrey Matveyev, a Russian resident in London, had been subjected to verbal and physical abuse by British bailiffs.\n\nModern diplomatic immunity evolved parallel to the development of modern diplomacy. In the 17th century, European diplomats realized that protection from prosecution was essential to doing their jobs, and a set of rules evolved guaranteeing the rights of diplomats. These were still confined to Western Europe and were closely tied to the prerogatives of nobility. Thus, an emissary to the Ottoman Empire could expect to be arrested and imprisoned upon the outbreak of hostilities between his state and the empire. The French Revolution also disrupted this system, as the revolutionary state and Napoleon imprisoned numerous diplomats who were accused of working against France. More recently, the Iran hostage crisis is universally considered a violation of diplomatic immunity. Although the hostage takers did not officially represent the state, host countries are obligated to protect diplomatic property and personnel. On the other hand, during World War II, diplomatic immunity was upheld and the embassies of the belligerents were evacuated through neutral countries.\n\nFor the upper class of the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, diplomatic immunity was an easy concept to understand. The first embassies were not permanent establishments but actual visits by high-ranking representatives, often close relatives, of the sovereign or the sovereign in person. As permanent representations evolved, usually on a treaty basis between two powers, they were frequently staffed by relatives of the sovereign or high-ranking nobles.\n\nWarfare was a status of hostilities not between individuals but between their sovereigns, and the officers and officials of European governments and armies often changed employers. Truces and ceasefires were commonplace, along with fraternization between officers of enemy armies during them. When prisoners, the officers usually gave their parole and were only restricted to a city away from the theatre of war. Almost always, they were given leave to carry their personal sidearms. Even during the French revolutionary wars, British scientists visited the French Academy. In such an atmosphere, it was easy to accept that some persons were immune to the laws. After all, they were still bound by strict requirements of honour and customs.\n\nIn the 19th century, the Congress of Vienna reasserted the rights of diplomats; and they have been largely respected since then, as the European model has spread throughout the world. Currently, diplomatic relations, including diplomatic immunity, are governed internationally by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which has been ratified by almost every country in the world.\n\nIn modern times, diplomatic immunity continues to provide a means, albeit imperfect, to safeguard diplomatic personnel from any animosity that might arise between nations. As one article put it: \"So why do we agree to a system in which we're dependent on a foreign country's whim before we can prosecute a criminal inside our own borders? The practical answer is: because we depend on other countries to honor our own diplomats' immunity just as scrupulously as we honor theirs.\"\n\nIn the United States, the Diplomatic Relations Act of 1978 ( et seq.) follows the principles introduced by the Vienna Conventions. The United States tends to be generous when granting diplomatic immunity to visiting diplomats, because a large number of U.S. diplomats work in host countries less protective of individual rights. If the United States were to punish a visiting diplomat without sufficient grounds, U.S. representatives in other countries could receive harsher treatment. If a person with immunity is alleged to have committed a crime or faces a civil lawsuit, the State Department asks the home country to waive immunity of the alleged offender so that the complaint can be moved to the courts. If immunity is not waived, prosecution cannot be undertaken. However, the State Department still has the right to expel the diplomat. In many such cases, the diplomat's visas are canceled, and he and his family may be barred from returning to the United States. Crimes committed by members of a diplomat's family can also result in dismissal.\n\nSome countries have made reservations to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, but they are minor. A number of countries limit the diplomatic immunity of persons who are citizens of the receiving country. As nations keep faith to their treaties with differing zeal, other rules may also apply, though in most cases this summary is a reasonably accurate approximation. The Convention does not cover the personnel of international organizations, whose privileges are decided upon on a case-by-case basis, usually in the treaties founding such organizations. The United Nations system (including its agencies, which comprise the most recognizable international bodies such as the World Bank and many others) has a relatively standardized form of limited immunities for staff traveling on U.N. laissez-passer; diplomatic immunity is often granted to the highest-ranking officials of these agencies. Consular officials (that do not have concurrent diplomatic accreditation) formally have a more limited form of immunity, generally limited to their official duties. Diplomatic technical and administrative staff also have more limited immunity under the Vienna Convention; for this reason, some countries may accredit a member of technical or administrative staff as an attaché.\n\nOther categories of government officials that may travel frequently to other countries may not have diplomatic passports or diplomatic immunity, such as members of the military, high-ranking government officials, ministers, and others. Many countries provide non-diplomatic official passports to such personnel, and there may be different classes of such travel documents such as official passports, service passports, and others. De facto recognition of some form of immunity may be conveyed by states accepting officials traveling on such documents, or there may exist bilateral agreements to govern such cases (as in, for example, the case of military personnel conducting or observing exercises on the territory of the receiving country).\n\nFormally, diplomatic immunity may be limited to officials accredited to a host country, or traveling to or from their host country. In practice, many countries may effectively recognize diplomatic immunity for those traveling on diplomatic passports, with admittance to the country constituting acceptance of the diplomatic status.\n\nIn reality, most diplomats are representatives of nations with a tradition of professional civil service, and are expected to obey regulations governing their behaviour and they suffer severe disciplinary action if they flout local laws. In many nations, a professional diplomat's career may be compromised if they (or members of their family) disobey the local authorities or cause serious embarrassment, and such cases are, at any rate, a violation of the spirit of the Vienna Conventions.\n\nThe Vienna Convention is explicit that \"without prejudice to their privileges and immunities, it is the duty of all persons enjoying such privileges and immunities to respect the laws and regulations of the receiving State.\" Nevertheless, on some occasions, diplomatic immunity leads to some unfortunate results; protected diplomats have violated laws (including those that would be violations at home as well) of the host country and that country has been essentially limited to informing the diplomat's nation that the diplomat is no longer welcome (\"persona non grata\"). Diplomatic agents are not, however, exempt from the jurisdiction of their home state, and hence prosecution may be undertaken by the sending state; for minor violations of the law, the sending state may impose administrative procedures specific to the foreign service or diplomatic mission.\n\nViolation of the law by diplomats has included espionage, smuggling, child custody law violations, money laundering, tax evasion, making terrorist threats, slavery, preying on children over the Internet for sex, and murder.\n\nGender based violence\n\nZimbabwe first lady Grace Mugabe invoked diplomatic immunity on the 15th of August, this is after charges were laid up against her by a South African model.\n\nOn-duty police officer Yvonne Fletcher was murdered in London in 1984, by a person shooting from inside the Libyan embassy during a protest. The incident caused a breakdown in diplomatic relations until Libya admitted \"general responsibility\" in 1999. The incident became a major factor in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's decision to allow President of the United States Ronald Reagan to launch the U.S. bombing of Libya in 1986 from American bases in the United Kingdom.\n\nIn 1987 in New York City, the Human Resources Administration placed 9-year-old Terrence Karamba in a foster home after his elementary school teachers noticed suspicious scars and injuries. He and his 7-year-old sister, who was also placed in City custody, told officials the wounds had been inflicted by their father, Floyd Karamba, an administrative attaché at the Zimbabwean Mission to the U.N. No charges were filed, as Mr. Karamba had diplomatic immunity.\n\nOn February 1999 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, Kazuko Shimokoji, wife of the Japanese Consul-General, showed up at the ER of a city hospital with two black eyes and a bruised neck. She told doctors that her husband had beaten her. When local police questioned her husband, Mr. Shimokoji said, \"Yes, I punched her out and she deserved it\", and described the incident as \"a cultural thing and not a big deal\". Although an arrest warrant was issued, Mr. Shimokoji could not be arrested due to his diplomatic immunity. However, his statement to the police was widely reported in both the local and Japanese press. The subsequent public uproar prompted the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to waive Mr. Shimokoji's immunity. Though he pleaded guilty in Canadian court, he was given an absolute discharge. Nonetheless, he was recalled to Japan where he was reassigned to office duty and had his pay cut.\n\nIn November 2006 in New York City, Fred Matwanga, Kenyan diplomat to the U.N., was taken into police custody by officers responding to reports that he had assaulted his son; he was released after asserting diplomat immunity.\n\nIn January 2011 in Lahore, Pakistan, American embassy employee Raymond Allen Davis shot and killed two Pakistani civilians, while a third man was struck and killed by a U.S. consulate car responding to the shooting. According to Davis, they were about to rob him and he acted in self-defense. When detained by police, Davis claimed to be a consultant at the U.S. consulate in Lahore. He was formally arrested and remanded into custody. Further investigations revealed that he was working with the CIA as a contractor in Pakistan. U.S. State Department declared him a diplomat and repeatedly requested immunity under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, to which Pakistan is a signatory. On March 16, 2011, Davis was released after the families of the two killed men were paid $2.4 million in \"diyya\" (a form of monetary compensation or blood money). Judges then acquitted him on all charges and Davis immediately departed Pakistan.\n\nIn April 2012 in Manila, Panamanian diplomat Erick Bairnals Shcks was accused of raping a 19-year-old Filipino woman, but was later released from detention because Shcks \"enjoys protection under the 1961 Vienna Convention\".\n\nIn March 2013, the Supreme Court of India restricted Italian ambassador Daniele Mancini from leaving India for breaching an undertaking given to the apex court. Despite Italian and European Union protests regarding the restrictions as contrary to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, the Supreme Court of India said it would be unacceptable to argue diplomatic immunity after voluntarily subjecting to court's jurisdiction. The Italian envoy had invoked Article 32 of the Constitution of India when filing an affidavit to the Supreme Court taking responsibility for the return of the two Italian marines to India after casting their votes in the March 2012 general elections in Italy. The Indian Supreme Court opined that the Italian ambassador had waived his diplomatic immunity and could be charged for contempt. The two marines were being tried in India for the murder of two Indian fishermen off the coast of Kerala (see the 2012 Italian Navy Marines shooting incident in the Laccadive Sea).\n\nIn October 2013, Russian diplomat Dmitri Borodin was arrested in The Hague, The Netherlands, after neighbours called the police. Borodin was alleged to have been drunk and violent towards his children, aged two and four. Police were in the area because Borodin's wife had lost control over her car while also under influence, and had rammed four parked cars near the diplomats' house. Russia immediately demanded an apology from the Dutch government for violating Borodin's diplomatic immunity. The row came at a time of tension between Russia and the Netherlands, after the Russian security services captured a Greenpeace vessel sailing under the Dutch flag, Arctic Sunrise, that was protesting against oil drilling in the Prirazlomnoye field.\n\nIn June 2014, the New Zealand government confirmed that Mohammed Rizalman Bin Ismail from Malaysia, aged in his 30s and employed at Malaysia's High Commission in Wellington, had invoked diplomatic immunity when faced with charges of burglary and assault with intent to rape after allegedly following a 21-year-old woman to her home. He returned to Malaysia in May 2014 with his family while the case was still in hearing. The New Zealand foreign ministry was criticized for allowing the defendant to leave the country, which was blamed on miscommunication between the foreign ministries of the two countries, as Prime Minister John Key expressed his view that \"the man should have faced the charges in New Zealand\". Malaysia eventually agreed to send the diplomat back to assist in investigations and he was eventually tried and detained in New Zealand.\n\nIn June 2017, in Germany a Saudi driver killed a cyclist by opening the door of his Porsche directly into the cyclist’s path without checking to see if the road was clear. Anger arose when the Saudi claimed diplomatic immunity. Police said that under normal circumstances driver would face investigation and possible prosecution on suspicion of negligent manslaughter, but prosecutors said they had no choice but to close the case because he has diplomatic immunity.\n\nIn July 2017, in Jordan, two Jordanian carpenters were invited to repair furniture at an Israeli diplomatic security agent's residence near the Israeli Embassy. It is believed that the Jordanians and Israeli security agent quarreled over the ongoing tensions regarding the installations of metal detectors at entry points to al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem. One carpenter, a teenager of Palestinian origin reportedly tried to stab the Israeli security agent with his screwdriver, and the Israeli security agent shot and killed the Jordanian carpenter, and inadvertently shot the property landlord as well, a doctor, who happened to be there at the time. . Israel refused to allow Jordanian authorities to question the agent, claiming diplomatic immunity under the Vienna convention.\n\nDiplomats and officials involved in drug smuggling have benefited from diplomatic immunity. For example, a Venezuelan general wanted in the United States on drugs charges was arrested in Aruba only to be released after the Venezuelan government protested his diplomatic immunity and threatened sanctions if Aruba did not release him.\n\nIn December 2014, Gambian diplomats were found guilty by Southwark Crown Court of London for selling tax-free tobacco from the Gambian embassy in the United Kingdom. The Crown Prosecution Service told the court that much of this was sold from the embassy without paying VAT and excise duty.\n\nDiplomatic immunity from local employment and labor law has precipitated incidents in which diplomatic staff have been accused of abusing local workers, who are often hired for positions requiring local knowledge (such as an administrative assistant, press/PR officer) or for general labor. In such situations, the employees are in a legal limbo where the laws of neither the host country nor the diplomat's country are enforceable. Diplomats have ignored local laws concerning minimum wages, maximum working hours, vacation and holidays, and in some cases have imprisoned employees in their homes, deprived them of their earned wages, passports, food, and communication with the outside world, abused them physically and emotionally, and invaded their privacy. Reported incidents include the following:\n\nA particular problem is the difficulty in enforcing ordinary laws, such as prohibitions on double parking. For example, the Autobahn 555 in Cologne, Germany was nicknamed the \"Diplomatenrennbahn\" (Diplomatic Raceway), back when Bonn was the capital of West Germany, because of the numerous diplomats that used to speed through the highway under diplomatic immunity. Certain cities, e.g., The Hague, have taken to impounding such cars rather than fining their owners. Diplomats' status does not guarantee the release of impounded cars.\n\nDiplomatic missions have their own regulations, but many require their staff to pay any fines due for parking violations. A 2006 economic study found that there was a significant correlation between home-country corruption (as measured by Transparency International) and unpaid parking fines: six countries had in excess of 100 violations per diplomat: Kuwait, Egypt, Chad, Sudan, Bulgaria and Mozambique. In particular, New York City, the home of the United Nations Headquarters, regularly protests to the United States Department of State about non-payment of parking tickets because of diplomatic status. As of 2001, the city had more than 200,000 outstanding parking tickets from diplomats, totaling more than $21.3 million, of which only $160,682 had been collected. In 1997, then-mayor Rudy Giuliani proposed to the Clinton administration that the U.S. State Department revoke the special DPL plates for diplomats who ignore parking summonses; the State Department denied Giuliani's request.\n\nIn cities that impose a congestion charge, the decision of some diplomatic missions not to furnish payment has proved controversial. In London, embassies have amassed approximately £58 million in unpaid charges as of 2012, with the American embassy comprising approximately £6 million and the Russian, German and Japanese missions around £2 million each.\n\nIn January 1997, Gueorgui Makharadze, a high-ranking Georgian diplomat, caused a five-car pileup in Washington, D.C., in the United States, which killed a 16-year-old girl. Makharadze's claim of diplomatic immunity created a national outrage in the United States, particularly given Makharadze's previous record of driving offenses: In April 1996, Makharadze had been charged with speeding in Virginia, and four months later, he was detained by District of Columbia police on suspicion of drunk driving. In both prior cases, charges were dismissed based on his immunity. On the basis of the media coverage, Georgia revoked Makharadze's immunity, and he was ultimately sentenced to seven years in prison after pleading guilty to one count of involuntary manslaughter and four counts of aggravated assault.\n\nOn 27 October 1998, in Vladivostok, Russia, Douglas Kent, the American Consul General to Russia, was involved in a car accident that left a young man, Alexander Kashin, disabled. Kent was not prosecuted in a U.S. court. Under the Vienna Convention, diplomatic immunity does not apply to civil actions relating to vehicular accidents, but in 2006, the U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that, since he was using his vehicle for consular purposes, Kent could not be sued civilly.\n\nIn 2001, a Russian diplomat, Andrei Knyazev, hit and killed a woman while driving drunk in Ottawa. Knyazev refused to take a breathalyzer at the scene of the crash, citing diplomatic immunity. Russia refused Canadian requests to waive his immunity, and Knyazev was expelled from Canada. Though the Russian Foreign Ministry fired him and charged him with involuntary manslaughter, and Russian and Canadian authorities cooperated in the investigation, the case caused a political storm in Canada. Many accused the Foreign Ministry of incompetence after it emerged that Knyazev had twice been previously investigated for drunk driving. The Canadian Foreign Minister had fought unsuccessfully to have Knyazev tried in Ottawa. In 2002, Knyazev was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter in Russia.\n\nOn 3 December 2004, in Bucharest, Romania, Christopher Van Goethem, an American Marine serving his embassy, ran a red traffic signal, collided with a taxi, and killed popular Romanian musician Teo Peter. Van Goethem's blood alcohol content was estimated at 0.09% from a breathalyser test, but he refused to give a blood sample for further testing and left for Germany before charges could be filed in Romania. The Romanian government requested the American government to lift his immunity, which it refused to do. In a court-martial, he was acquitted of manslaughter and adultery (which is still a court martial offence) but was convicted of obstruction of justice and making false statements.\n\nOn 9 December 2009, in Tanzania, Canadian Junior Envoy Jean Touchette was arrested after it was reported that he spat at a traffic police officer on duty in the middle of a traffic jam in the Banana district on the outskirts of Dar es Salaam. Canada's High Commissioner, Robert Orr, was summoned by the Tanzanian Foreign Ministry over the incident, and the junior envoy was later recalled.\n\nOn 15 December 2009, in Singapore, the Romanian chargé d'affaires, Silviu Ionescu, was allegedly behind a drunk-driving hit-and-run accident that killed a 30-year-old man and seriously injured two others. He left Singapore for Romania three days after the accident. The Romanian foreign ministry suspended Ionescu from his post. A coroner's inquiry in Singapore, which included testimony by the Romanian embassy driver, concluded that Ionescu was solely responsible for the accident. An Interpol Red Notice was subsequently issued for his arrest and possible extradition notwithstanding the fact that Romania had not waived his diplomatic immunity and had commenced criminal proceedings against him in Romania. The Singapore government argued that by reason of Article 39(2) of the Vienna Convention, Ionescu was no longer protected by diplomatic immunity.\n\nOn 10 April 2011, in Islamabad, Pakistan, Patrick Kibuta, an electrical engineer in the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan caused a vehicle collision with another vehicle, while under the influence of alcohol. Kibuta, who was driving in the opposing lane, injured a Canadian citizen residing in Islamabad, who suffered multiple fractures and required surgery. The Kohsar police impounded Mr. Kibuta's U.N. vehicle on the scene, and a blood test confirmed that he had an elevated blood alcohol level. Charges for reckless and drunken driving were filed against Kibuta, who enjoyed diplomatic immunity.\n\nIn July 2013, Joshua Walde, an American diplomat in Nairobi, Kenya, crashed into a mini-bus, killing one man and seriously injuring eight others, who were left with no financial assistance to pay for hospital bills. United States embassy officials took the diplomat and his family out of Kenya the following day. The United States government was concerned about the impact the accident could have on bilateral relations with Kenya. Walde gave a statement to police, but was not detained due to his diplomatic immunity. Kenyan police say the case remains under investigation.\n\nOn September 12, 2015, Sheikh Khalid bin Hamad Al Thani tried to claim diplomatic immunity when his Ferrari LaFerrari and a Porsche 911 GT3 were caught on camera drag racing through a residential neighborhood in Beverly Hills. He owns the cars and a drag racing team, and is a member of Qatar's ruling family. The Beverly Hills Police Department contacted the U.S. State Department to clarify if he had diplomatic immunity. They stated he did not. However, his face was not shown on camera, and no officer witnessed the crime, so the state of California has not yet pressed charges. He has since fled the country. The investigation is ongoing.\n\nOn 14 February 2013, a vehicle bearing diplomatic plates registered to the US Embassy got into an accident in Islamabad, Pakistan involving two residents out of which one was killed and the other survived. Murder charges were laid under Section 320 of Pakistan Penal Code against the driver of the vehicle who is a diplomat according to Pakistani official.\n\nHistorically, the problem of large debts run up by diplomats has also caused many problems. Some financial institutions do not extend credit to diplomats because they have no legal means of ensuring the money be repaid. Local citizens and businesses are often at a disadvantage when filing civil claims against a diplomat, especially in cases of unpaid rent, alimony, and child support.\n\nThe bulk of diplomatic debt lies in the rental of office space and living quarters. Individual debts can range from a few thousand dollars to $1 million in back rent. A group of diplomats and the office space in which they work are referred to as a diplomatic mission. Creditors cannot sue missions individually to collect money they owe. Landlords and creditors have found that the only thing they can do is contact a city agency to see if they can try to get some money back. They cannot enter the offices or apartments of diplomats to evict them because the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act says that \"the property in the United States of a foreign state shall be immune from attachment, arrest and execution\" (). This has led creditors who are owed money by diplomats to become more cautious about their renters and to change their rental or payment policies.\n\nIn one case, for example, officials from Zaire stopped paying rent to their private landlord and ran up $400,000 in debt. When the landlord sued, the U.S. State Department defended the Zaireans on the basis of diplomatic immunity, and a circuit court agreed. When the landlord finally cut off the utilities, the officials fled without paying their back rent. The landlords reportedly later reached an \"amicable agreement\" with the Zaire government.\n\nThe issue of abusing diplomatic immunity in family relations, especially alimony and child support, has become so widespread that it prompted discussion at the 1995 U.N. Fourth World Conference on Women, in Beijing. Historically, the United Nations has not become involved with family disputes and has refused to garnish the wages of diplomats who owe money for child support, citing Sovereign Immunity. However, in September 1995, the incumbent head of Legal Affairs for the United Nations acknowledged there was a moral and legal obligation to take at least a partial responsibility in family disputes. Fathers working as diplomats who refused to fulfill their family-related financial duties were increasing in numbers in the United Nations: several men who had left their wives and children were still claiming U.N. dependency, travel, and education allowances for their families, though they are no longer supporting those families.\n\nDiplomats are exempt from most taxes, but not from \"charges levied for specific services rendered\". In certain cases, whether a payment is or is not considered a tax may be disputed, such as central London's congestion charge. It was reported in 2006 that the UAE embassy had agreed to pay their own accumulated charges of nearly £100,000.\n\nThere is an obligation for the receiving State not to \"discriminate as between states\"; in other words, any such fees should be payable by all accredited diplomats equally. This may allow the diplomatic corps to negotiate as a group with the authorities of the receiving country.\n\nDiplomats are exempt from import duty and tariffs for items for their personal use. In some countries, this has led to charges that diplomatic agents are profiting personally from resale of \"tax free\" goods. The receiving state may choose to impose restrictions on what may reasonably constitute personal use (for example, only a certain quantity of cigarettes per day). When enacted, such restrictions are generally quite generous so as to avoid tit-for-tat responses.\n\nOn 24 April 2008, in New Orleans, Mexican press attaché Rafael Quintero Curiel was seen stealing BlackBerry PDA units from a White House press meeting room. Quintero made it all the way to the airport before members of the United States Secret Service caught up with him. He initially denied taking the devices, but after being confronted with security video, Quintero claimed it was purely accidental, gave the devices back, claimed diplomatic immunity and left New Orleans with the Mexican delegation. He was eventually fired for the incident.\n\nThe following chart outlines the immunities afforded to foreign diplomatic personnel residing in the United States. In general, these rules follow the Vienna Convention (or the New York Convention for UN officials) and apply in other countries as well (with the exceptions of immunities for United Nations officials, which can vary widely across countries based on the \"Host Country Agreement\" signed between the UN and the host country, whereby additional immunities beyond those granted by the New York Convention may be established).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8922", "title": "DDR SDRAM", "text": "DDR SDRAM\n\nDouble data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory (DDR SDRAM) is a class of memory integrated circuits used in computers. DDR SDRAM, also called DDR1 SDRAM, has been superseded by DDR2 SDRAM, DDR3 SDRAM and DDR4 SDRAM. None of its successors are forward or backward compatible with DDR1 SDRAM, meaning DDR2, DDR3, and DDR4 memory modules will not work in DDR1-equipped motherboards, and vice versa.\n\nCompared to single data rate (SDR) SDRAM, the DDR SDRAM interface makes higher transfer rates possible by more strict control of the timing of the electrical data and clock signals. Implementations often have to use schemes such as phase-locked loops and self-calibration to reach the required timing accuracy. The interface uses double pumping (transferring data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal) to double data bus bandwidth without a corresponding increase in clock frequency. One advantage of keeping the clock frequency down is that it reduces the signal integrity requirements on the circuit board connecting the memory to the controller. The name \"double data rate\" refers to the fact that a DDR SDRAM with a certain clock frequency achieves nearly twice the bandwidth of a SDR SDRAM running at the same clock frequency, due to this double pumping.\n\nWith data being transferred 64 bits at a time, DDR SDRAM gives a transfer rate of (memory bus clock rate) × 2 (for dual rate) × 64 (number of bits transferred) / 8 (number of bits/byte). Thus, with a bus frequency of 100 MHz, DDR SDRAM gives a maximum transfer rate of 1600 MB/s.\n\n\"Beginning in 1996 and concluding in June 2000, JEDEC developed the DDR (Double Data Rate) SDRAM specification (JESD79).\" JEDEC has set standards for data rates of DDR SDRAM, divided into two parts. The first specification is for memory chips, and the second is for memory modules.\n\nNote: All above listed are specified by JEDEC as JESD79F. All RAM data rates in-between or above these listed specifications are not standardized by JEDEC—often they are simply manufacturer optimizations using tighter-tolerance or overvolted chips.\n\nThe package sizes in which DDR SDRAM is manufactured are also standardized by JEDEC.\n\nThere is no architectural difference between DDR SDRAM designed for different clock frequencies, for example, PC-1600, designed to run at 100 MHz, and PC-2100, designed to run at 133 MHz. The number simply designates the data rate at which the chip is guaranteed to perform, hence DDR SDRAM is guaranteed to run at lower (\"underclocking\") and can possibly run at higher (\"overclocking\") clock rates than those for which it was made.\n\nDDR SDRAM modules for desktop computers, dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs), have 184 pins (as opposed to 168 pins on SDRAM, or 240 pins on DDR2 SDRAM), and can be differentiated from SDRAM DIMMs by the number of notches (DDR SDRAM has one, SDRAM has two). DDR SDRAM for notebook computers, SO-DIMMs, have 200 pins, which is the same number of pins as DDR2 SO-DIMMs. These two specifications are notched very similarly and care must be taken during insertion if unsure of a correct match. Most DDR SDRAM operates at a voltage of 2.5 V, compared to 3.3 V for SDRAM. This can significantly reduce power consumption. Chips and modules with DDR-400/PC-3200 standard have a nominal voltage of 2.6 V.\n\nJEDEC Standard No. 21–C defines three possible operating voltages for 184 pin DDR, as identified by the key notch position relative to its centreline. Page 4.5.10-7 defines 2.5V (left), 1.8V (centre), TBD (right), while page 4.20.5–40 nominates 3.3V for the right notch position. The orientation of the module for determining the key notch position is with 52 contact positions to the left and 40 contact positions to the right.\n\nIncreasing operating voltage slightly can increase maximum speed, at the cost of higher power dissipation and heating, and at the risk of malfunctioning or damage.\n\nMany new chipsets use these memory types in multi-channel configurations.\n\n\n\nTo increase memory capacity and bandwidth, chips are combined on a module. For instance, the 64-bit data bus for DIMM requires eight 8-bit chips, addressed in parallel. Multiple chips with the common address lines are called a memory rank. The term was introduced to avoid confusion with chip internal rows and banks. A memory module may bear more than one rank. The term sides would also be confusing because it incorrectly suggests the physical placement of chips on the module.\n\nAll ranks are connected to the same memory bus (address+data). The Chip Select signal is used to issue commands to specific rank.\n\nAdding modules to the single memory bus creates additional electrical load on its drivers. To mitigate the resulting bus signaling rate drop and overcome the memory bottleneck, new chipsets employ the multi-channel architecture.\n\n\n\n\nModule and chip characteristics are inherently linked.\n\nTotal module capacity is a product of one chip's capacity by the number of chips. ECC modules multiply it by 8/9 because they use one bit per byte for error correction. A module of any particular size can therefore be assembled either from 32 small chips (36 for ECC memory), or 16(18) or 8(9) bigger ones.\n\nDDR memory bus width per channel is 64 bits (72 for ECC memory). Total module bit width is a product of bits per chip by number of chips. It also equals number of ranks (rows) multiplied by DDR memory bus width. Consequently, a module with greater amount of chips or using ×8 chips instead of ×4 will have more ranks.\n\nThis example compares different real-world server memory modules with a common size of 1 GB. One should definitely be careful buying 1 GB memory modules, because all these variations can be sold under one price position without stating whether they are ×4 or ×8, single or dual ranked.\n\nThere is a common belief that number of module ranks equals number of sides. As above data shows, this is not true. One can also find 2-side/1-rank modules. One can even think of a 1-side/2-rank memory module having 16(18) chips on single side ×8 each, but it's unlikely such a module was ever produced.\n\nFrom JEDEC Board Ballot JCB-99-70, and modified by numerous other Board Ballots, formulated under the cognizance of Committee JC-42.3 on DRAM Parametrics.\n\nStandard No. 79 Revision Log:\n\n\"This comprehensive standard defines all required aspects of 64Mb through 1Gb DDR SDRAMs with X4/X8/X16 data interfaces, including features, functionality, ac and dc parametrics, packages and pin assignments. This scope will subsequently be expanded to formally apply to x32 devices, and higher density devices as well.\"\n\nPC3200 is DDR SDRAM designed to operate at 200 MHz using DDR-400 chips with a bandwidth of 3,200 MB/s. Because PC3200 memory transfers data on both the rising and falling clock edges, its effective clock rate is 400 MHz.\n\n1 GB PC3200 non-ECC modules are usually made with sixteen 512 Mbit chips, eight on each side (512 Mbits × 16 chips) / (8 bits (per byte)) = 1,024 MB. The individual chips making up a 1 GB memory module are usually organized as 2 eight-bit words, commonly expressed as 64M×8. Memory manufactured in this way is low-density RAM and will usually be compatible with any motherboard specifying PC3200 DDR-400 memory.\n\nIn the context of the 1 GB non-ECC PC3200 SDRAM module, there is very little visually to differentiate low density from high density RAM. High density DDR RAM modules will, like their low density counterparts, usually be double-sided with eight 512 Mbit chips per side. The difference is that each chip, instead of being organized as 64M×8, is organized as 2 four-bit words, or 128M×4.\n\nHigh density memory modules are assembled using chips from multiple manufacturers. These chips come in both the familiar 22 × 10 mm (approx.) TSOP2 and smaller squarer 12 × 9 mm (approx.) FBGA package sizes. High density chips can be identified by the numbers on each chip.\n\nHigh density RAM devices were designed to be used in registered memory modules for servers. JEDEC standards do not apply to high-density DDR RAM in desktop implementations. JEDEC's technical documentation, however, supports 128M×4 semiconductors as such that contradicts 128×4 being classified as high density. As such, \"high density\" is a relative term, which can be used to describe memory which is not supported by a particular motherboard's memory controller.\n\nDDR (DDR1) was superseded by DDR2 SDRAM, which had modifications for higher clock frequency and again doubled throughput, but operates on the same principle as DDR. Competing with DDR2 was Rambus XDR DRAM. DDR2 dominated due to cost and support factors. DDR2 was in turn superseded by DDR3 SDRAM which offered higher performance for increased bus speeds and new features. DDR3 has been superseded by DDR4 SDRAM, which was first produced in 2011 and whose standards were still in flux (2012) with significant architectural changes.\n\nDDR's prefetch buffer depth is 2 (bits), while DDR2 uses 4. Although the effective clock rates of DDR2 are higher than DDR, the overall performance was no greater in the early implementations, primarily due to the high latencies of the first DDR2 modules. DDR2 started to be effective by the end of 2004, as modules with lower latencies became\navailable.\n\nMemory manufacturers stated that it was impractical to mass-produce DDR1 memory with effective transfer rates in excess of 400 MHz (i.e. 400 MT/s and 200 MHz external clock) due to internal speed limitations. DDR2 picks up where DDR1 leaves off, utilizing internal clock rates similar to DDR1, but is available at effective transfer rates of 400 MHz and higher. DDR3 advances extended the ability to preserve internal clock rates while providing higher effective transfer rates by again doubling the prefetch depth.\n\nThe DDR4 SDRAM is a high-speed dynamic random-access memory internally configured as sixteen-banks, 4 bank group with 4\nbanks for each bank group for x4/x8 and eight-banks, 2 bank group with 4 banks for each bankgroup for x16 DRAM.\nThe DDR4 SDRAM uses a 8n prefetch architecture to achieve high-speed operation. The 8n prefetch architecture is combined with\nan interface designed to transfer two data words per clock cycle at the I/O pins. A single read or write operation for the DDR4 SDRAM\nconsists of a single 8n-bit wide, four clock data transfer at the internal DRAM core and eight corresponding n-bit wide, one-half clock\ncycle data transfers at the I/O pins.\n\nRDRAM was a particularly expensive alternative to DDR SDRAM, and most manufacturers dropped its support from their chipsets. DDR1 memory's prices substantially increased since Q2 2008 while DDR2 prices declined. In January 2009, 1 GB DDR1 was 2–3 times more expensive than 1 GB DDR2. High density DDR RAM will suit about 10% of PC motherboards on the market while low density will suit almost all motherboards on the PC Desktop market.\n\nMDDR is an acronym that some enterprises use for Mobile DDR SDRAM, a type of memory used in some portable electronic devices, like mobile phones, handhelds, and digital audio players. Through techniques including reduced voltage supply and advanced refresh options, Mobile DDR can achieve greater power efficiency.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8927", "title": "Don Rosa", "text": "Don Rosa\n\nKeno Don Hugo Rosa (), known simply as Don Rosa (born June 29, 1951), is an American comic book author and illustrator known for his stories about Scrooge McDuck, Donald Duck and other Disney characters. Many of his stories are built on characters and locations created by Carl Barks, including the story that brought him to fame as a modern Disney artist – the Harvey Award-nominated comic, \"The Son of the Sun\".\n\nRosa created about 90 stories between 1987 and 2006. In 1995 he won the Eisner Award for \"Best Serialized Story\" for his 12-chapter work \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\".\n\nDon Rosa's grandfather, Gioachino Rosa, lived in Maniago, a town at the foot of the Alps in Northern Italy, in the province of Pordenone. He emigrated to Kentucky, United States around 1900, established a successful tile and terrazzo company, then returned to Italy to marry and start a family. In 1915 just after the birth of his son Ugo Rosa, Gioachino returned to Kentucky with his wife, two daughters and two sons. Ugo Rosa grew up and was later married in Kentucky. His wife was born to a German American father and a mother with both Scottish and Irish ancestry.\n\nDon Rosa was born Keno Don Hugo Rosa on June 29, 1951 in Louisville, Kentucky. He was named after both his father and grandfather. Gioachino was called \"Keno\" for short. Don's father was named Ugo Dante Rosa, but used the name \"Hugo Don\" Rosa in America.\n\nRosa was exposed to comics at a very young age, as his 11-years-older sister was a comics hoarder, and had thousands of comics for Don to look at and later read. Rosa began drawing comics before being able to write. Until he attended Saint Xavier High School in Louisville, Kentucky, his featured characters were a large cast of stick figures featured in comedy-adventures like the Barks comics and old movies Rosa enjoyed most. He never tried to draw more than stick figures, because the drawings, for him, were illustrations to get the story told. Only the story was important to him, not the actual drawings. His favorite comic books growing up were \"Uncle Scrooge\" by Western Publishing and \"Little Lulu\" comics from Dell Comics (Western Publishing), and his sister's collection of MAD comics and magazines. When he was 12 years old he also discovered and enjoyed the Superman titles by DC Comics of the editor Mort Weisinger period, drawn mostly by his favorite Superman artists Curt Swan and Kurt Schaffenberger. Shortly after starting to collect Superman comics he started to trade the collection of his older sister for Superman Comics. Since a comic book shop in his area traded two old comics for one new, he only had two Duck comics left from his sister's collection by the 1970s, one of them being \"The Golden Helmet\". When he became a serious collector of older comics, he particularly enjoyed the classic E.C. horror and science fiction comics of the 1950s, Will Eisner's \"The Spirit\", Walt Kelly's \"Pogo\", and most comics of the 1940s onward.\n\nRosa entered the University of Kentucky in 1969. He graduated in 1973 with a Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering.\n\nIn 1969 while still in college, Rosa won an award as \"best political cartoonist in the nation in a college paper\". \"I'm not really an editorial cartoonist. I'd much rather be doing comedy adventure. But I must have done something right, for at one point \"The Journal of Higher Education\" named me one of the five or six best college newspaper cartoonists in the nation.\"\nRosa's first published comic (besides the spot illustrations in his grade school and high school newspapers) was a comic strip featuring his own character, Lancelot Pertwillaby, titled \"The Pertwillaby Papers\". He created the strip in 1971 for \"The Kentucky Kernel\", a college newspaper of the University of Kentucky, which wanted the strip to focus on political satire.\n\nRosa later switched the strip to comedy-adventure, his favorite style of comics, and drew the story \"Lost in (an alternative section of) the Andes\". (The title is a reference to \"Lost in the Andes!\", a Donald Duck story by Carl Barks, first published in April, 1949.) The so-called \"Pertwillaby Papers\" included 127 published episodes by the time Rosa graduated in 1973.\n\nMeanwhile, Rosa participated in contributing art and articles to comic collector fanzines. One contribution was \"An Index of Uncle Scrooge Comics\". According to his introduction: \"\"Scrooge being my favorite character in comic history and Barks my favorite pure cartoonist, I'll try not to get carried away too much.\"\"\n\nAfter attaining his bachelor's degree, Rosa continued to draw comics purely as a hobby, his only income came from working in the \"Keno Rosa Tile Company\", a company founded by his paternal grandfather and which had been taken over by Hugo Rosa.\n\nRosa authored and illustrated the monthly \"Information Center\" column in the fanzine \"\"Rocket's Blast Comicollector\"\" from 1974 to 1979. This was a question-and-answer feature dealing with readers' queries on all forms of pop entertainment of which Rosa was a student, including comics, TV and movies. He also revived the \"Pertwillaby Papers\" in this \"RBCC\" fanzine as a comic book style story rather than a newspaper comic strip from 1976 to 1978.\n\nBy now having become a locally known comics collector and cartoonist, Rosa accepted an offer from the editor of the local newspaper to create a weekly comic strip. This led to his creation of the comic strip character Captain Kentucky for the Saturday edition of the local newspaper \"Louisville Times\". Captain Kentucky was the superhero alter ego of Lancelot Pertwillaby. The pay was $25/week and not worth the 12+ hours each week's strip entailed, but Rosa did it as part of his hobby. Publication started on October 6, 1979. The comic strip ended on August 15, 1982 after the publication of 150 episodes. After three years with Captain Kentucky, Don decided that it was not worth the effort. He retired from cartooning and did not draw a single line for the next four years. Years later, as his fame grew, his non-Disney work was published by the Norwegian publisher Gazette Bok in 2001, in the two hard-cover \"Don Rosa Archives\" volumes, \"The Pertwillaby Papers\" and \"The Adventures of Captain Kentucky\".\n\nIn 1986, Rosa discovered a Gladstone Publishing comic book. This was the first American comic book that contained Disney characters since Western Publishing's discontinuation of their Whitman Comics in 1984. Since early childhood Don Rosa had been fascinated by Carl Barks' stories about Donald Duck and Scrooge McDuck. Artist Carl Barks was an especially big idol for him and would remain so for the rest of his career. He immediately called the editor, Byron Erickson, and told him that he was the only American who was born to write and draw one Scrooge McDuck adventure. Erickson agreed to let him send a story, and Don Rosa started drawing his first Duck story, \"The Son of the Sun\", the very next day.\n\n\"The Son of the Sun\" was a success and Rosa's very first professional comic story was nominated for a Harvey Award \"Best Story of the Year\". The plot of the story was the same as his earlier story, \"Lost in (an alternative section of) the Andes\". As Don Rosa explained it, he was just \"(...) turning that old Pertwillaby Papers adventure back into the story it originally was in my head, starring Scrooge, Donald, the nephews, and Flintheart Glomgold.\"\n\nRosa created a few more comics for Gladstone until 1989. He then stopped working for them, because the policies of their licensor, Disney, did not allow for the return of original art for a story to its creators. This was unacceptable to Don Rosa, since a part of his income came from selling the originals, and the original art is the property of the freelance artists, unless otherwise agreed upon. Without that extra money, he could not make a living drawing comic books.\n\nAfter making some stories for the Dutch publisher Oberon, the publishers of an American Disney children's magazine called \"DuckTales\" (based on the animated series of the same name) offered Rosa employment. They even offered him a much higher salary than the one he received at Gladstone. Rosa made just one script (\"Back in Time for a Dime\"). The publishers never asked him to make more, and due to problems with receiving the payment, he did not care.\n\nAfter working with the DuckTales magazine, Rosa found out that the Danish publisher Egmont (at that time called Gutenberghus) was publishing reprints of his stories and wanted more. Rosa joined Egmont in 1990. Two years later, at Rosa's suggestion, Byron Erickson, the former editor at Gladstone also went to work for Egmont and has been working there as an editor and later as a freelancer.\n\nIn 1991 Rosa started creating \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", a 12 chapter story about his favorite character. The series was a success, and in 1995 he won an Eisner Award for best continuing series. After the end of the original series, Rosa sometimes produced additional \"missing\" chapters. Some of the extra chapters were turned down by Egmont, because they were not interested in any more episodes. Fortunately, the French magazine \"Picsou\" was eager to publish the stories. From 1999, Rosa started working freelance for Picsou magazine as well. All of these chapters were compiled as \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Companion\".\n\nDuring early summer 2002, Rosa suddenly laid down work. As an artist he could not live under the conditions Egmont was offering him, but he did not want to give up making Scrooge McDuck comics either. So, his only choice was to go on hiatus and try to come to an agreement with Egmont. His main issues were that he had no control over his works. Rosa had discovered too often that his stories were printed with incorrect pages of art, improper colors, poor lettering, or pixelated computer conversions of the illustrations. Another matter was that his name was used in promotion of books and collections of stories without his agreement and without sending royalties to him. Rosa has never, as with any other Disney artist, received royalties for a single use of any of his stories worldwide.\n\nRosa came to an agreement with Egmont in December of the same year, which gave him a bit more control over the stories and the manner in which they were publicized.\n\nRosa's eyesight had been very poor since his childhood. In 2006 and 2007 he began having new difficulties, which made drawing a very slow and tedious process for him, even more so than normally. In March 2008, Rosa suffered a severe retinal detachment and underwent emergency eye surgery that proved to be only partially successful. Further surgery in both eyes made drawing even more difficult. On June 2, 2008, during an interview at the Danish Komiks.dk fair, Rosa stated that he would not do any more Disney comics, citing eye troubles, low pay, and the constant use of his stories in special hardback or album editions by international Disney licensees without any payment of royalties or requests for permission for the use of his name.\n\nRosa is very popular with readers in Europe. He considers himself rather obscure in his native United States. According to him, even his next-door neighbors do not know his profession.\n\nIn 1980, Rosa married Ann Payne. Payne is a retired social studies middle school teacher.\n\nIn Europe, Rosa is recognized as one of the best Disney comics creators. Carl Barks and Rosa are among the few artists who have their name written on the covers of Disney magazines when their stories are published. Rosa enjoys including subtle references to his favorite works of fiction as well as his own previous work. He normally uses about 12 panels per page, instead of the more common eight. He needs to use the extra panels, because his stories usually are too long to be published if he does not minimize them.\n\nRosa has an especially large following in Finland, and in 1999, he created a special 32-page Donald, Scrooge, Gearloose & nephews strip for his Finnish fans; \"Sammon Salaisuus\" (translates to \"The secret of the Sampo\", but it is officially named \"The Quest for Kalevala\" in English), based on the Finnish national epic, the Kalevala. The publication of this story created a national sensation in Finland where Donald Duck and the Kalevala are important aspects of culture. It was published in many other countries as well. The cover for the comic book was a spoof of a famous painting by Akseli Gallen-Kallela.\n\nThe latest work that Rosa has worked on is a cover for the album \"Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge\" by Tuomas Holopainen from Nightwish.\n\nWith a bachelor of arts degree in civil engineering as his only real drawing education, Rosa has some unusual drawing methods, as he writes: \"\"I suspect nothing I do is done the way anyone else does it.\"\"\n\nBecause of being self-taught in making comics, Rosa relies mostly on the skills he learned in engineering school, which means using technical pens and templates extensively. He applies templates and other engineering tools to draw curves, circles and ovals. He usually drew just under a page per day, but that depended on the amount of detail he puts in the picture.\n\nRosa's drawing style is considered much more detailed and \"dirtier\" than that of most other Disney artists, living or dead, and often likened to that of underground artists, and he is frequently compared to Robert Crumb. When Rosa was first told of this similarity, he said that he \"drew that bad\" long before he discovered underground comics during college. He went on to explain these similarities to underground artists with a similar background of making comics as a hobby:\n\n\"\"I want to take everything Barks wrote and forge it into a workable timeline. My original dream was to become the new Carl Barks. I wanted to write, draw, and letter all my own stories. People tell me that my pencils look just like Barks, but my inks are pure Rosa, and I can't letter properly! So I'll have to settle for being Don Rosa.\"\" – Don Rosa in 1987\n\n\"\"Don Rosa has often been called the heir of Carl Barks, especially for the way in which he has carried on the Ducks' Family Saga. But I don't think so: in my opinion Don Rosa \"[...]\" is an author who has used Barks' characters to make stories that are completely new, 'Donrosian' rather than 'Barksian', just like Barks can't be considered the heir of Al Taliaferro only because he has worked on the Ducks after him.\"\" – Carlo Chendi, Italian Disney comics writer (see Italian Wikipedia: )\n\nRosa's idol when it comes to comics is Carl Barks. Rosa builds almost all his stories on characters and locations that Barks invented. Many of Rosa's stories contain references to some fact pointed out in a Barks story. At the request of publishers in response to reader demands, Rosa has even created sequels of old Barks stories. For example, his \"Return to Xanadu\" is a sequel to \"Tralla La\", where the Ducks return to the same hidden country. To add more to his admiration and consistency to Barks and Barks' stories, Rosa makes all his ducks' stories set in the 1950s. This is because Barks writes most of the stories about Scrooge, Donald and all people of Duckburg in the 1950s (it also conveniently resolves potential continuity problems, such as Scrooge's age). As explained in text pages in the \"Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" and its companion volume, Rosa does intense research of time periods to ensure not only that he gets the physical details right, but also to ensure that all characters could have been present.\n\nBarks either created most of the characters used by Rosa or is credited for greatly developing their personalities. Rosa thus feels obliged to make his stories factually consistent. He has spent a lot of time in making lists of facts and anecdotes pointed out in different stories by his mentor. Especially \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" was based mostly on the earlier works of Barks. Rosa admitted however that a scene of the first chapter was inspired by a story by Tony Strobl.\n\nAs most of the characters Rosa uses were created by Barks, and because Rosa considers Scrooge rather than Donald to be the main character of the Duck universe, he does not regard himself as a pure Disney artist, nor the characters really as Disney's. \"Rosa prefers to say that the characters he uses are Barks's, Barks having reshaped Donald Duck's personality and creating everything else we know of Duckburg while working as a freelancer in 1942–1967 for an independent licensed publisher (Dell/Western Comics). Barks even claimed to have also created Huey, Dewey and Louie while working as a writer on Donald Duck animated cartoons in 1937.\" Because of his idolization of Barks, he repeatedly discourages his fans to use an absolutist way of saying his clearly different drawing style would be better than Barks's, and he found that notion confirmed when Barks himself spoke about Rosa's style in a critical tone though it is uncertain whether those comments were Barks's or those of his temporary \"business managers\" who filtered his communications.\n\n\"\"I usually don't like my stories. I mean I try really hard, but I know I don't draw that well. I know people like it because it's got lots of extra details, but art directors know good artwork, and they know mine is not good artwork. Now, people always say, 'You're being too modest, you're being too modest', and I say, 'What?' They just have to ask me the right question. I know it's not good artwork and I don't know if it's well-drawn, but I know it's entertaining.\"\" – Don Rosa, Torino Comics Festival, April 2011\n\n\"\"Don Rosa has a style that is a little bit different from the Disney style. I know that there is a great deal of people that like that style, which is extremely detailed. So there is room in the business for artists like Don Rosa and for others like Van Horn. They have a different style. But if they have a good story and tell it properly, then people are going to like it.\"\" – Carl Barks, interview given at Disneyland Paris, July 7, 1994\n\nBeside Rosa's constant effort to remain faithful to the universe Barks created, there is also a number of notable differences between the two artists. The most obvious of these is Rosa's much more detailed drawing style, often with many background gags, which has been credited as being a result of Rosa's love of the Will Elder stories of MAD comics and magazines. While Barks himself discouraged the use of extreme grimacing and gesturing in any other panel for comical or dramatic effect, Rosa's stories are rich with colorful and bizarre facial renditions and physical slapstick. Barks had over 600 Duck stories to his name while Rosa only created 85 until his eye trouble set in, but whereas Barks made many short one and two-pagers centered around a subtle, compact gag, Rosa's oeuvre consists almost exclusively of long adventure stories.\n\nAndrea \"Bramo\" Bramini identifies the following four differences between Barks's and Rosa's way of storytelling:\n\nMost of Rosa's stories have the letters D.U.C.K. hidden within either the first panel or, if Rosa has created the cover art, within the cover art itself. D.U.C.K. is an acronym for \"Dedicated to Uncle Carl from Keno\" (Carl being Carl Barks and Keno being Rosa's given first name). Rosa began this practice in response to Disney's objection to personal signatures in their comics. After Disney discovered Rosa's inclusion of D.U.C.K. in his work, they objected again, forcing Rosa to hide the letters in various and unlikely places within his drawings. \n\nRosa has drawn covers for reprints of Carl Barks stories and has included his signature D.U.C.K. within them as well.\n\nAnother curiosity is his Hidden Mickeys. Rosa is only interested in creating stories featuring the Duck family, but he often hides small Mickey Mouse heads or figures in the pictures, sometimes in a humiliating or unwanted situation. An example of this is in the story \"The Terror of the Transvaal\" where a flat Mickey can be seen under an elephant's foot. This is mostly a gag done for the fun of it. Rosa has admitted to neither liking nor disliking Mickey Mouse, but being indifferent to him.\n\nIn the story \"Attack of the Hideous Space-Varmints\", the asteroid with Uncle Scrooge's money bin on it crashes into the Moon along with two missiles, creating a large Mickey Mouse head on the surface. When Huey, Dewey and Louie tell Donald that the missiles hit the \"dark\" (far) side of the Moon, Donald is thankful no one is going to see it  — \"For a minute there, I thought we were going to have some legal problems.\"\n\nIn the second Rosa story featuring The Three Caballeros, Donald Duck is shocked by the sight of a capybara standing on its hind legs, with shrubs, leaves and fruit in front of its body, coincidentally making it look like Mickey Mouse. José Carioca and Panchito Pistoles, never having seen Mickey Mouse, ask Donald what is wrong, but Donald replies he is just tired. Later in the same story, the Caballeros free several animals from a poacher. One panel shows the animals fleeing; Mickey can be seen among them.\n\nIn \"The Quest for Kalevala\" this running gag can be seen on the original, Akseli Gallen-Kallela-inspired cover art. In the original work, Louhi is depicted as bare-chested, but the Disneyfied version has been drawn a top, of fabric patterned with Mickey Mouse heads.\n\nHis work has won Rosa a good deal of recognition in the industry, including nominations for the Comics' Buyer's Guide Award for Favorite Writer in 1997, 1998, and 1999. Heidi MacDonald of Comics Buyer's Guide also mentioned Rosa's 1994 story \"Guardians of the Lost Library\" as \"\"possibly the greatest comic book story of all time\"\".\n\nIn 1995 Rosa was awarded the Eisner Award for \"Best Serialized Story\" for \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". In 1997 he won an Eisner for \"Best Artist/Writer – Humor Category\".\n\nRosa's story \"The Black Knight GLORPS Again!\" was nominated for the 2007 Eisner Award in the category Best Short Story. While \"The Prisoner of White Agony Creek\", Rosa's latest Duck story to-date, was published in 2006, he has also been nominated for the 2007 Harvey Awards in five categories (more than any other creator for this year) for Uncle Scrooge comics: \"Best Writer\", \"Best Artist\", \"Best Cartoonist\", \"Best Cover Artist\", and \"Special Award for Humor in Comics.\" In 2013 Rosa received the Bill Finger Award which recognises excellence in comic book writing for writers who have not received their rightful reward and/or recognition.\n\nInternational \"Best Cartoonist of the Year\" awards include:\n\nIn 1997 the Italian publishing house Editrice ComicArt published a lavish volume about Rosa's biography and work related to the Disney characters. It was titled \"Don Rosa e il Rinascimento Disneyano\" (\"Don Rosa and the Disneyean Renaissance\") and written by famous Disney and Rosa scholars, Alberto Becattini, Leonardo Gori and Francesco Stajano. This work not only discusses all of Rosa's creative life up to 1997, but it also gives a comprehensive biography, lists up to that date his Disney work and presents an extensive interview with Rosa.\n\nIn 2009, Danish director Sebastian S. Cordes shot a 75-minute documentary called \"The Life and Times of Don Rosa\", consisting of exclusive interviews with Rosa himself on his farm near Louisville, Kentucky. According to the project's Facebook group, the English-language DVD has been released in Denmark on April 16, 2011 and is available internationally through the website \"forlaget-afart.dk/\".\n\nIn 2011, Italian Disney fan forum \"papersera.net\" published \"Don Rosa: A Little Something Special\" (edited by Italian Rosa fan Paolo Castagno), a large folio format, bilingual (Italian and English) book about Rosa's life and work, containing interviews with Rosa and articles by many Italian and European Disney artists, Disney scholars, and established art critics commenting on Rosa's work and career, also including many exclusive, rare Rosa drawings and illustrations. The book was originally made as a gift by \"papersera.net\" for Rosa himself upon the occasion of Rosa's April 2011 visit to Turin, Italy.\n\n\nApart from the \"Don Rosa Collection\" in Germany and Scandinavia these series only contain Rosa's work for Disney.\n\n"}
{"id": "8930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8930", "title": "Dziga Vertov", "text": "Dziga Vertov\n\nDziga Vertov (; born David Abelevich Kaufman, , and also known as Denis Kaufman; 2 January 1896 – 12 February 1954) was a Soviet pioneer documentary film and newsreel director, as well as a cinema theorist. His filming practices and theories influenced the cinéma vérité style of documentary movie-making and the Dziga Vertov Group, a radical film-making cooperative which was active from 1968 to 1972.\n\nIn the 2012 \"Sight & Sound\" poll, critics voted Vertov's \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (1929) the 8th best film ever made.\n\nVertov's younger brothers Boris Kaufman and Mikhail Kaufman were also noted filmmakers, as was his wife, Elizaveta Svilova.\n\nVertov was born David Abelevich Kaufman () into a family of Jewish lineage in Białystok, Poland, then a part of the Russian Empire. He Russified his Jewish name David and patronymic Abelevich to Denis Arkadievich at some point after 1918. Vertov studied music at Białystok Conservatory until his family fled from the invading German Army to Moscow in 1915. The Kaufmans soon settled in Petrograd, where Vertov began writing poetry, science fiction and satire. In 1916-1917 Vertov was studying medicine at the Psychoneurological Institute in Saint Petersburg and experimenting with \"sound collages\" in his free time. He eventually adopted the name \"Dziga Vertov\", which translates loosely from Ukrainian as 'spinning top'.\n\nVertov is known for many early writings, mainly while still in school, that focus on the individual versus the perceptive nature of the camera lens, which he was known to call his \"second eye\".\n\nMost of Vertov's early work was unpublished, and few manuscripts remain after the Second World War, though some material survived in later films and documentaries created by Vertov and his brothers, Boris Kaufman and Mikhail Kaufman.\n\nVertov is also known for quotes on perception, and its ineffability, in relation to the nature of qualia (sensory experiences).\n\nAfter the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, at the age of 22, Vertov began editing for \"Kino-Nedelya\" (, the Moscow Cinema Committee's weekly film series, and the first newsreel series in Russia), which first came out in June 1918. While working for \"Kino-Nedelya\" he met his future wife, the film director and editor, Elizaveta Svilova, who at the time was working as an editor at Goskino. She began collaborating with Vertov, beginning as his editor but becoming assistant and co-director in subsequent films, such as \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (1929), and \"Three Songs About Lenin\" (1934).\n\nVertov worked on the \"Kino-Nedelya\" series for three years, helping establish and run a film-car on Mikhail Kalinin's agit-train during the ongoing Russian Civil War between Communists and counterrevolutionaries. Some of the cars on the agit-trains were equipped with actors for live performances or printing presses; Vertov's had equipment to shoot, develop, edit, and project film. The trains went to battlefronts on agitation-propaganda missions intended primarily to bolster the morale of the troops; they were also intended to stir up revolutionary fervor of the masses.\n\nIn 1919, Vertov compiled newsreel footage for his documentary \"Anniversary of the Revolution;\" in 1921 he compiled \"History of the Civil War.\" The so-called \"Council of Three,\" a group issuing manifestoes in LEF, a radical Russian newsmagazine, was established in 1922; the group's \"three\" were Vertov, his (future) wife and editor Elizaveta Svilova, and his brother and cinematographer Mikhail Kaufman. Vertov's interest in machinery led to a curiosity about the mechanical basis of cinema.\n\nIn 1922, the year that \"Nanook of the North\" was released, Vertov started the Kino-Pravda series. The series took its title from the official government newspaper \"Pravda\". \"Kino-Pravda\" (literally translated, \"film truth\") continued Vertov's agit-prop bent. \"The Kino-Pravda group began its work in a basement in the centre of Moscow\" Vertov explained. He called it damp and dark. There was an earthen floor and holes one stumbled into at every turn. Dziga said, \" This dampness prevented our reels of lovingly edited film from sticking together properly, rusted our scissors and our splicers.\" \"Before dawn- damp, cold, teeth chattering- I wrap comrade Svilova in a third jacket.\" [quotation needed]\n\nVertov's driving vision, expounded in his frequent essays, was to capture \"film truth\"—that is, fragments of actuality which, when organized together, have a deeper truth that cannot be seen with the naked eye. In the \"Kino-Pravda\" series, Vertov focused on everyday experiences, eschewing bourgeois concerns and filming marketplaces, bars, and schools instead, sometimes with a hidden camera, without asking permission first. The episodes of \"Kino-Pravda\" usually did not include reenactments or stagings (one exception is the segment about the trial of the Social Revolutionaries: the scenes of the selling of the newspapers on the streets and the people reading the papers in the trolley were both staged for the camera). The cinematography is simple, functional, unelaborate—perhaps a result of Vertov's disinterest in both \"beauty\" and the \"grandeur of fiction.\" Twenty-three issues of the series were produced over a period of three years; each issue lasted about twenty minutes and usually covered three topics. The stories were typically descriptive, not narrative, and included vignettes and exposés, showing for instance the renovation of a trolley system, the organization of farmers into communes, and the trial of Social Revolutionaries; one story shows starvation in the nascent Communist state. Propagandistic tendencies are also present, but with more subtlety, in the episode featuring the construction of an airport: one shot shows the former Tsar's tanks helping prepare a foundation, with an intertitle reading \"Tanks on the labor front.\"\n\nVertov clearly intended an active relationship with his audience in the series—in the final segment he includes contact information—but by the 14th episode the series had become so experimental that some critics dismissed Vertov's efforts as \"insane\". Vertov responds to their criticisms with the assertion that the critics were hacks nipping \"revolutionary effort\" in the bud, and concludes the essay with his promise to \"explode art's tower of Babel.\" In Vertov's view, \"art's tower of Babel\" was the subservience of cinematic technique to narrative, commonly known as the Institutional Mode of Representation.\n\nBy this point in his career, Vertov was clearly and emphatically dissatisfied with narrative tradition, and expresses his hostility towards dramatic fiction of any kind both openly and repeatedly; he regarded drama as another \"opiate of the masses\". Vertov freely admitted one criticism leveled at his efforts on the \"Kino-Pravda\" series—that the series, while influential, had a limited release.\n\nBy the end of the \"Kino-Pravda\" series, Vertov made liberal use of stop motion, freeze frames, and other cinematic \"artificialities,\" giving rise to criticisms not just of his trenchant dogmatism, but also of his cinematic technique. Vertov explains himself in \"On 'Kinopravda'\": in editing \"chance film clippings\" together for the Kino-Nedelia series, he \"began to doubt the necessity of a literary connection between individual visual elements spliced together... This work served as the point of departure for 'Kinopravda.'\" Towards the end of the same essay, Vertov mentions an upcoming project which seems likely to be \"Man with the Movie Camera\", calling it an \"experimental film\" made without a scenario; just three paragraphs above, Vertov mentions a scene from \"Kino Pravda\" which should be quite familiar to viewers of \"Man with the Movie Camera\": the peasant works, and so does the urban woman, and so too, the woman film editor selecting the negative...\"\n\nWith Lenin's admission of limited private enterprise through his New Economic Policy (NEP) of 1921, Russia began receiving fiction films from afar, an occurrence that Vertov regarded with undeniable suspicion, calling drama a \"corrupting influence\" on the proletarian sensibility (\"On 'Kinopravda,'\" 1924). By this time Vertov had been using his newsreel series as a pedestal to vilify dramatic fiction for several years; he continued his criticisms even after the warm reception of Sergei Eisenstein's \"Battleship Potemkin\" in 1925. \"Potemkin\" was a heavily fictionalized film telling the story of a mutiny on a battleship which came about as a result of the sailors' mistreatment; the film was an obvious but skillful propaganda piece glorifying the proletariat. Vertov lost his job at Sovkino in January 1927, possibly as a result of criticizing a film which effectively preaches the line of the Communist Party. He was fired for making \"A Sixth Part of the World: Advertising and the Soviet Universe\" for the State Trade Organization into a propaganda film, selling the Soviet as an advanced society under the NEP, instead of showing how they fit into the world economy. The Ukraine State Studio hired Vertov to create \"Man with a Movie Camera\".\nVertov says in his essay \"The Man with a Movie Camera\" that he was fighting \"for a decisive cleaning up of film-language, for its complete separation from the language of theater and literature.\" By the later segments of \"Kino-Pravda\", Vertov was experimenting heavily, looking to abandon what he considered film clichés (and receiving criticism for it); his experimentation was even more pronounced and dramatic by the time of \"Man with a Movie Camera\", which was filmed in Ukraine. Some have criticized the obvious stagings in this film as being at odds with Vertov's credos of \"life as it is\" and \"life caught unawares\": the scene of the woman getting out of bed and getting dressed is obviously staged, as is the reversed shot of the chess pieces being pushed off a chess board and the tracking shot which films Mikhail Kaufman riding in a car filming a third car.\n\nHowever, Vertov's two credos, often used interchangeably, are in fact distinct, as Yuri Tsivian points out in the commentary track on the DVD for \"Man with the Movie Camera:\" for Vertov, \"life as it is\" means to record life as it would be without the camera present. \"Life caught unawares\" means to record life when surprised, and perhaps provoked, by the presence of a camera. This explanation contradicts the common assumption that for Vertov \"life caught unawares\" meant \"life caught unaware of the camera.\" All of these shots might conform to Vertov's credo \"caught unawares.\" His slow motion, fast motion, and other camera techniques were a way to dissect the image, Mikhail Kaufman stated in an interview. It was to be the honest truth of perception. For example, in \"Man with a Movie Camera\", two trains are shown almost melting into each other, although we are taught to see trains as not riding that close, Vertov tried to portray the actual sight of two passing trains. Mikhail spoke about Eisenstein's films as being different from his and his brother's in that Eisenstein, \"came from the theatre, in the theatre one directs dramas, one strings beads.\" \"We all felt...that through documentary film we could develop a new kind of art. Not only documentary art, or the art of chronicle, but rather an art based on images, the creation of an image-oriented journalism\" Mikhail explained. More than even film truth, \"Man with a Movie Camera\", was supposed to be a way to make those in the Soviet Union more efficient in their actions. He slowed down his actions, such as the decision whether to jump or not, you can see the decision in his face, a psychological dissection for the audience. He wanted a peace between the actions of man and the actions of a machine, for them to be, in a sense, one.\n\n\"Cine-Eye\" is a montage method developed by Dziga Vertov which was first formulated in his work \"WE: Variant of a Manifesto\" in 1919.\n\nDziga Vertov believed his concept of Kino-Glaz, or \"Cine Eye\" in English, would help contemporary \"man\" evolve from a flawed creature into a higher, more precise form. He compared man unfavorably to machines: \"In the face of the machine we are ashamed of man’s inability to control himself, but what are we to do if we find the unerring ways of electricity more exciting than the disorderly haste of active people [...]\" \"I am an eye. I am a mechanical eye. I, a machine, I am showing you a world, the likes of which only I can see\" Dziga was quoted as saying.\n\nLike other Russian filmmakers, he attempted to connect his ideas and techniques to the advancement of the aims of the Soviet Union. Whereas Sergei Eisenstein viewed his montage of attractions as a creative tool through which the film-viewing masses could be subjected to \"emotional and psychological influence\" and therefore able to perceive \"the ideological aspect\" of the films they were watching, Vertov believed the Kino-Eye would influence the actual evolution of man, \"from a bumbling citizen through the poetry of the machine to the perfect electric man.\"\n\nVertov surrounded himself with others that were also firm believers in his ideas. These were the Kinoks, other Russian filmmakers that would assist him in his hopes of making \"cine-eye\" a success.\n\nVertov believed film was too \"romantic\" and \"theatricalised\" due to the influence of literature, theater, and music, and that these psychological film-dramas \"prevent man from being as precise as a stop watch and hamper his desire for kinship with the machine.\"\nHe desired to move away from \"the pre-Revolutionary ‘fictional’ models\" of filmmaking to one based on the rhythm of machines, seeking to \"bring creative joy to all mechanical labour\" and to \"bring men closer to machines.\"\n\nVertov's cinema success continued into the 1930s. In 1931, he released \"Enthusiasm: Symphony of the Donbass\", an examination into Soviet miners. \"Enthusiasm\" has been called a 'sound film', with sound recorded on location, and these mechanical sounds woven together, producing a symphony-like effect.\n\nThree years later, \"Three Songs about Lenin\" looked at the revolution through the eyes of the Russian peasantry. For his film, however, Vertov had been hired by Mezhrabpomfilm, a Soviet studio that produced mainly propaganda efforts. The film, finished in January 1934 for Lenin's obit, was only publicly released in November of that year. A new version of the film was published in 1938, including a longer sequence to reflect Stalin's \"achievements\" at the end of the film and leaving out footage with \"enemies\" of that time. Today there exists a 1970 reconstruction by Elizaveta Svilova. With the rise and official sanction of socialist realism in 1934, Vertov was forced to cut his personal artistic output significantly, eventually becoming little more than an editor for Soviet newsreels. \"Lullaby\", perhaps the last film in which Vertov was able to maintain his artistic vision, was released in 1937. Dziga Vertov died of cancer in Moscow in 1954.\n\nVertov's brother Boris Kaufman was a noted cinematographer who worked much later for directors such as Elia Kazan and Sidney Lumet in the United States. (He won an Oscar for his work on \"On the Waterfront\".) His other brother, Mikhail Kaufman, worked as Vertov's cinematographer until he became a documentarian in his own right. Mikhail Kaufman's directorial debut was the film In Spring made in 1929. In September 1929, Vertov married his long-time collaborator Elizaveta Svilova.\n\nVertov's legacy still lives on today. His ideas are echoed in cinéma vérité, the movement of the 1960s named after Vertov's Kino-Pravda. The 1960s and 1970s saw an international revival of interest in Vertov.\n\nThe independent, exploratory style of Vertov influenced and inspired many filmmakers and directors like the Situationist Guy Debord and independent companies such as \"Vertov Industries,\" in Hawaii. The Dziga Vertov Group borrowed his name. In 1960, Jean Rouch used Vertov's filming theory when making \"Chronicle of a Summer\". His partner Edgar Morin coined \"Cinéma vérité\" term when describing the style, using direct translation of Vertov’s KinoPravda.\n\nThe Free Cinema movement in the United Kingdom during the 1950s, the Direct Cinema in North America in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and the \"Candid Eye\" series in Canada in the 1950s, all essentially owed a debt to Vertov.\n\nThis revival of Vertov's legacy included rehabilitation of his reputation in the Soviet Union, with retrospectives of his films, biographical works and writings. In 1962, the first Soviet monograph on Vertov was published, followed by another collection, 'Dziga Vertov: Articles, Diaries, Projects.' To recall the 30th anniversary of Vertov's death, three New York cultural organizations put on the first American retrospective of Vertov's work.\nNew Media theorist Lev Manovich suggested Vertov as one of the early pioneers of database cinema genre in his essay \"Database as a symbolic form\".\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8932", "title": "Deimos", "text": "Deimos\n\nDeimos, a Greek word for \"dread\", may refer to:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8933", "title": "Delaware General Corporation Law", "text": "Delaware General Corporation Law\n\nThe Delaware General Corporation Law (Title 8, Chapter 1 of the Delaware Code) is the statute governing corporate law in the U.S. state of Delaware. It has been the most important jurisdiction in United States corporate law since the early 20th century. Over 50% of publicly traded corporations in the United States and 60% of the Fortune 500 are incorporated in the state.\n\nDelaware acquired its status as a corporate haven in the early 20th century. Following the example of New Jersey, which enacted corporate-friendly laws at the end of the 19th century to attract businesses from New York, Delaware adopted on March 10, 1899, a general incorporation act aimed at attracting more businesses. The group that pushed for this legislation intended to establish a corporation that would sell services to other businesses incorporating in Delaware. Before the rise of general incorporation acts, forming a corporation required a special act of the state legislature. General incorporation allowed anyone to form a corporation by simply raising money and filing articles of incorporation with the state's Secretary of State.\n\n\nBecause of the extensive experience of the Delaware courts, , which serves to give corporations and their counsel greater guidance on matters of corporate governance and transaction liability issues. Disputes over the internal affairs of Delaware corporations are usually filed in the Delaware Court of Chancery, which is a separate court of equity, as opposed to a court of law. Because it is a court of equity, there are no juries, and its cases are heard by judges, called chancellors. Since 1989, the court has consisted of one Chancellor and four Vice Chancellors. The court is a trial court, with one chancellor hearing each case. Litigants may appeal final decisions of the Court of Chancery to the Delaware Supreme Court.\n\nDelaware has also attracted major credit card banks because of its relaxed rules regarding interest. Many U.S. states have usury laws limiting the amount of interest a lender can charge. Federal law allows a national bank to \"import\" these laws from the state in which its principal office is located. Delaware (amongst others) has relatively relaxed interest laws, so several national banks have decided to locate their principal office in Delaware. National banks are, however, corporations formed under federal law, not Delaware law. A corporation formed under Delaware state law benefits from the relaxed interest rules to the extent it conducts business in Delaware, but is subject to restrictions of other states' laws if it conducts business in other states.\n\nPursuant to the \"internal affairs doctrine\", corporations which act in more than one state are subject only to the laws of their state of incorporation with regard to the regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation. As a result, Delaware corporations are subject almost exclusively to Delaware law, even when they do business in other states.\n\nWhile most states require a for-profit corporation to have at least one director and two officers, Delaware laws do not have this restriction. All offices may be held by a single person who also can be the sole shareholder. The person, who does not need to be a U.S. citizen or resident, may also operate anonymously with only the Listing Agent with whom the company is registered with Delaware named.\n\nAccording to Section 226 of the Delaware General Corporation Law (DGCL) the Court of Chancery is permitted to appoint a receiver or custodian for a corporation when its stockholders or directors are divided and the deadlock is injurious to the corporation. In August 2015, the head of the Delaware Chancery, Chancellor Andre Bouchard employed 226(a) of the DGCL to order the dissolution of a company that was not in financial distress, nor at risk of insolvency, because its co-owners could not get along. The forced sale of TransPerfect is the first time a company that did not meet the criteria for receivership and mandated sale under Delaware law was being forced to dissolve, to award one board member who wanted to exit with a control premium. Former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has taken an interest in this case because he views it as \"contradictory\" to the Delaware corporate laws.\n\nUnder the law, the Chancery is not obligated or even mandated to make accommodations for any party to sell his or her interest. The only concern for the Delaware court is to make sure that a company is run well and not being harmed. In this regard, the case of TransPerfect can seem at odds with the court's mandate. The Chancellor decided to mandate the sale of the company because the two directors were locked in a dispute that left them unable to negotiate among themselves. At issue, however, is that in doing so, the Chancery and the Chancellor appear to be seeking an inequitable share for one of the partners who wanted to exit and asked for an offer to leave, forcing the partner who would prefer to remain and operate the firm to exit as well. The court cited employee affidavits attesting to one party's commitment over the other's.\n\nOn April 27, 2016, rather than sealing his decision, Chancellor Bouchard told the parties to take more time and to come to a resolution outside of the courtroom. Shawe then made a public offer of $300M to his co-founder.\n\nDelaware charges no income tax on corporations not operating within the state, so taking advantage of Delaware's other benefits does not result in taxation. At the same time, Delaware has a particularly aggressive tax on banks that locate in the state. However, in general, the state is viewed as a positive location for corporate tax purposes because favorable laws of incorporation allow companies to minimize corporate expenditures (achieved through legal standardization of corporate legal processes), creating a nucleus in Delaware with operating companies often in other states.\n\nIn addition, Delaware has used its position as the state of incorporation to generate revenue from its abandoned and unclaimed property laws. Under U.S. Supreme Court precedent, the state of incorporation gets to keep any abandoned and unclaimed property, such as uncashed checks and unredeemed gift certificates, if the corporation does not have information about the location of the owner of the property.\n\nA state may levy, however, a franchise tax on the corporations incorporated in it. Franchise taxes in Delaware are actually far higher than in most other states which typically charge little or nothing beyond corporate income taxes on the portion of the corporation's business done in that state. Delaware's franchise taxes supply about one-fifth of its state revenue.\n\nIn February 2013, \"Economist\" published an article on tax-friendly jurisdictions, commenting that Delaware stood for \"Dollars and Euros Laundered And Washed At Reasonable Expense\". Jeffrey W. Bullock, Delaware's Secretary of State, insists that the state has struck the right balance between curbing criminality and \"paying deference to the millions of legitimate businesspeople who benefit\" from hassle-free incorporation.\n\nOn June 30, 2013, Delaware Governor Jack Markell signed into law amendments to the Delaware General Corporation Law that affect several provisions in the current law and could substantially affect the process through which public companies are merged. The new legislation took effect August 1, 2013, except for ratification of defective corporate acts amendment which took effect in 2014.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8935", "title": "Detroit River", "text": "Detroit River\n\nThe Detroit River flows for from Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie as a strait in the Great Lakes system and forms part of the border between Canada and the United States. The river divides the metropolitan areas of Detroit, Michigan and Windsor, Ontario - an area referred to as Detroit–Windsor. The two cities are connected by the Ambassador Bridge, the Detroit–Windsor Tunnel and the Michigan Central Railway Tunnel.\n\nThe river's name comes from the French \"Rivière Détroit\", meaning \"River of the Strait\". The Detroit River has served an important role in the history of Detroit and is one of the busiest waterways in the world. The river travels west and south from Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie, and the whole river is coterminous with the border between Canada and the United States.\n\nThe river serves as an important transportation route connecting Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, and Lake Superior to the St. Lawrence Seaway and Erie Canal. When Detroit underwent rapid industrialization at the turn of the 20th century, the Detroit River became notoriously polluted and toxic. In recent years, however, the ecological importance of the river has warranted a vast restoration effort, and the river today has a wide variety of economical and recreational uses. There are numerous islands in the Detroit River, and much of the lower portion of the river is incorporated into the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge. The portion of the river in the city of Detroit has been organized into the Detroit International Riverfront and the William G. Milliken State Park and Harbor. The Detroit River is designated an American Heritage River and a Canadian Heritage River — the only river to have this dual designation.\n\nThe Detroit River flows for from Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie. By definition, this classifies it as both a river and a strait — a strait being a narrow passageway connecting two large bodies of water, which is how the river earned its name from early French settlers. However, today, the Detroit River is rarely referred to as a strait, because bodies of water referred to as straits are typically much wider. The Detroit River is only wide. The Detroit River starts on an east to west flow but then bends and runs north to south. The deepest portion of the Detroit River is deep in the northern portion of the river. At its source, the river is at an elevation of above sea level. The river drops only three feet before entering into Lake Erie at . As the river contains no dams and no locks, it is easily navigable by even the smallest of vessels. The watershed basin for the Detroit River is approximately . Since the river is fairly short, it has few tributaries. Its largest tributary is the River Rouge in Michigan, which is actually four times longer than the Detroit River and contains most of the basin. The only other major American tributary to the Detroit River is the much smaller Ecorse River. Tributaries on the Canadian side include Little River, Turkey Creek and the River Canard. The discharge for the Detroit River is relatively high for a river of its size. The river's average discharge is approximately 188,000 cubic feet per second (5,324 m³/s), and the river's flow is constant.\n\nThe Detroit River forms a major element of the international border between the United States and Canada. The river on the American side is all under the jurisdiction of Wayne County, Michigan, and the Canadian side is under the administration of Essex County, Ontario. The largest city along the Detroit River is Detroit, and most of the population along the river lives in Michigan. The Detroit River has only two automobile traffic crossings connecting the United States and Canada: the Ambassador Bridge and the Detroit–Windsor Tunnel. Both of these are heavily protected by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection and the Canada Border Services Agency.\n\nThe upper portion of the river is one of the few places where a Canadian city lies directly south of an American city. In this case, the city of Detroit is directly north of the city of Windsor, Ontario. The only other location where this occurs is Fort Erie, Ontario, lying south of several cities in Niagara County, New York. The cities and communities southwest of Detroit along the American side of the river are popularly referred to as the Downriver area, because those areas are said to be \"down the river\" from Detroit. Several of these communities do not actually border the Detroit River; the term \"Downriver\" is used to refer to a cluster of 18 suburban communities that lie to the southwest of the city of Detroit and to the west of the Detroit River.\n\nThe Detroit River contains numerous islands, whose ownership and control varies depending on their location along the river. The majority are on the American side of the river; there are none that are divided by the international border. Many are very small and uninhabited. However, Grosse Ile on the U.S. side and Bois Blanc (Boblo) Island on the Canadian side have permanent populations. Most are in the southern portion of the waterway, close to where the river empties into Lake Erie. Belle Isle, in the northern section of the river, is a Michigan State Park, and is open to the public via a bridge connection with the city.\n\nThe Detroit River was first navigated by non-natives in the 17th century. The Iroquois traded furs with the Dutch colonists at New Amsterdam by traveling through the Detroit River. The French later claimed the area for New France. The famed sailing ship \"Le Griffon\" reached the mouth of the Detroit River in mid-August 1679 on its maiden voyage through the Great Lakes. Later, when the French began settling in the area, they navigated the river using canoes made of birch or elm bark. Handcrafted vessels were a common mode of travel across the river, and the pirogue and bateaux were also used. As the North American fur trade intensified, European settlers began expanding their trade westward into the uncharted territories. French explorer Antoine Laumet de La Mothe, sieur de Cadillac sailed up the Detroit River on July 23, 1701. The next day, he established Fort Pontchartrain du Détroit, which became Detroit. The river itself became known as the Rivière Détroit, in which \"détroit\" is French for \"strait\". The river was known literally as the \"River of the Strait\".\n\nThe Detroit River — and the larger area surrounding it — was taken from the French by Great Britain during the French and Indian War. It was claimed by the newly formed United States during the American Revolution but was not turned over by the British until 1796. During the War of 1812, the Detroit River served as a major barrier between the American Michigan Territory and British Upper Canada, especially during the Battle of Fort Detroit in August 1812, when Detroit briefly fell to the British. Following the completion of the Erie Canal in 1817, which opened up easier travel to Lake Erie from the East Coast of the United States, the Detroit River became a heavily traversed route for settlers traveling to northern Michigan, and Detroit, as well, experienced a sudden increase in population. Following the Patriot War which nearly saw a battle between British regulars and Michigan militia on the ice-covered Detroit River, Fort Wayne was constructed at Detroit to counter Britain's riverside Fort Malden at Amherstburg. During the American Civil War (1861–1865), the Union feared that the seceded Confederate States of America (CSA) would plan a northerly attack from Canada, which was still owned by the British Empire and remained neutral in the war. The Union feared that the CSA would cross the Detroit River to launch this attack. For that reason, the Detroit River was heavily patrolled and the fortification at Fort Wayne improved, even though it was far removed from any real combat. While no major attack came from Canada, a plot to capture the U.S. Navy warship, USS \"Michigan\" and liberate Confederate prisoners from Johnson Island, in western Lake Erie, was narrowly averted only after the Confederates had captured two passenger steamships. At the beginning of the 20th century, Detroit's industrialization took off on an unprecedented scale. The Detroit River became the busiest commercial river in the world and was dubbed \"the Greatest Commercial Artery on Earth\" by \"The Detroit News\" in 1908. In 1907, the Detroit River carried 67,292,504 tons (61 billion kg) of shipping commerce through Detroit to locations all over the world. For comparison, London shipped 18,727,230 tons (16 billion kg), and New York shipped 20,390,953 tons (18 billion kg).\nFrom 1920 to 1933 there was Prohibition in the United States, and the sale, manufacture, and transportation of alcohol for consumption were nationally banned. Detroit, as the largest city bordering Canada, where alcohol remained legal during Prohibition, became the center of a new industry known as rum-running - the illegal smuggling or transporting of alcoholic beverages. \n\nThere were no bridges in the area connecting Canada and the United States until the Ambassador Bridge was finished in 1929 and the Detroit–Windsor Tunnel in 1930 so boats were used to smuggle alcohol across the river during the summer, and during the winter months, rum-runners traveled across the frozen Detroit River by car to Canada and back with trunk loads of alcohol. In some cases, overloaded cars fell through the ice, and today, car parts from this illegal era can still be seen on the bottom of the river. Rum-running in Windsor became a very common practice, and led to the rise of mobsters such as the Purple Gang, who used violence as a means to control the route known as the \"Detroit-Windsor Funnel\" — parodying the newly built tunnel. The Detroit River, Lake St. Clair, and the St. Clair River are estimated to have carried 75% of all liquor smuggled into the United States during Prohibition. Government officials were unable or unwilling to deter the flow. \n\nThe rum-running industry died when prohibition was repealed in 1933 by the Twenty-first Amendment.\nMuch of the land surrounding the Detroit River is urbanized and, in some places, heavily industrialized. This has resulted in excessive water pollution from the unregulated dumping of chemicals and industrial waste for many decades. Much of the garbage and sewage from Detroit's rapid industrialization found its way into the river. Much of the Detroit River and its shoreline were heavily polluted and unsafe for recreational use. Large quantities of this pollution collected around the mouth of the Detroit River at Lake Erie. The pollutants were so high after the spring thaw that thousands of migrating birds were killed by oil slicks and contaminated water every year. Oxygen levels in the river were depleted to the point where fish were unable to inhabit its waters. Because much of this pollution drained into and affected Lake Erie, the lake itself was considered \"dead\" and unable to support aquatic life.\n\nIn 1961, the Wyandotte National Wildlife Refuge was founded by congressional order. That paved the way for tighter restrictions on industries and allocated substantial amounts of government funding to clean up the river. However, there was little support toward cleaning up the river, because it would negatively affect Detroit's industrialism and economy. In 1970, the entire fishing industry in the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, the Detroit River, and Lake Erie had to be closed due to toxic levels of mercury found in the water. This, in turn, spurred a massive conservation effort aimed at cleaning up the Detroit River. For years before, conservation efforts were halted by the enormous multimillion-dollar cost of removing pollutants from the river. In addition to that, industries, which had significant political influence, detested the regulations necessary to lessen the amount of pollutants in the river. In 2001, the Wyandotte National Wildlife Refuge was absorbed into the much larger Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge, which is a cooperative effort between the United States and Canada to preserve the area as an ecological refuge. Millions of dollars so far have been used to dredge pollutants out of the river, and the recent cleaning up and restoration of the Detroit River is remarkable, although other problems are still at hand. Today, many species of native animals are returning to the area after being driven out by human development. The Detroit River is home to a growing number of bird species, such as eagles (including reintroduced bald eagles), ospreys, and peregrine falcons. Fish species in abundance in the area include lake whitefish, sturgeon, silver bass, black bass, salmon, perch, and walleye. The Detroit River was designated as an American Heritage River in 1998 and a Canadian Heritage River in 2001 — the only river to have dual designations.\n\nThe Detroit River is used for shipping and trading. The earliest use of the river for such economic activities was the shipping of furs for trade as early as the 17th century. When the fur trade decreased, Michigan had already begun to exploit the lumber-rich areas of Northern Michigan and the Upper Peninsula. Detroit turned into a major industrial region, largely because of the Detroit River. The only way a ship could travel out of the upper Great Lakes system was to travel down the Detroit River. From there, ships could travel anywhere in the world out of the St. Lawrence Seaway or the Erie Canal to New York City. At the beginning of the 20th century, the automotive industry boomed, and the many manufacturers shipped in abundant supplies of iron ore, sand, limestone and wood.\nFirst hand, the Detroit River provides a substantial amount of revenue for the local economies. A study in 1991 showed that $20.1 million came from sales related to waterfowl hunting along the Detroit River. During the same year, bird watching, photography, and other non-consumptive uses of waterfowl contributed an additional $192.8 million to Michigan’s economy. Local economies benefit through boating registrations and fishing licenses. It is estimated that walleye fishing alone brings in $1 million to the economy of communities along the lower Detroit River each spring. Other fish caught by recreational fisherman include white bass, bluegill, crappie, freshwater drum, smallmouth bass, northern pike and muskie. There are over 800,000 recreation boats in the state of Michigan, and more than half of those are regularly used on or near the Detroit River. A percentage of the tourist revenue depends on the Detroit River, which is the most noticeable environmental feature in Detroit. Popular river destinations in the city of Detroit include the Detroit International Riverfront and Belle Isle Park — both of which host a number of events throughout the year. Several restaurants on the river have dock facilities for boaters. Tour boats and dinner cruises travel through the sights of Detroit and the undeveloped islands downriver. Cruise ships support tourism on the Great Lakes and dock at the Port Detroit passenger terminal downtown. The iconic Renaissance Center is located on the banks of the Detroit River.\n\nAccording to a 2004 study, 150,000 jobs and $13 billion in annual production depend on the river crossings connecting Detroit to Windsor. In 2004, the total American trade with Ontario alone was $407 billion, in which 28% ($113.3 billion) crossed the Detroit River.\n\nThe only two automobile traffic routes that completely cross the river are the privately owned Ambassador Bridge and the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel, both of which connect Detroit, Michigan to Windsor, Ontario. A railway tunnel and a commercial truck ferry service also travel between Detroit and Windsor. In Michigan, there are two bridges connecting the mainland to Grosse Ile and the MacArthur Bridge, popularly known as the \"Belle Isle Bridge,\" that connects the City of Detroit to Belle Isle Park. All crossings (ports of entry) on the American side are secured by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection's Office of Field Operations and on the Canadian side by the Canada Border Services Agency; all areas between the American ports of entry and on the American side of the river are secured by the United States Border Patrol.\n\nProposals have been made to create a third crossing to connect Detroit and Windsor. The exact location for this crossing is the most debated element, as it could negatively affect a large number of environmental features and communities along the river. The Gordie Howe International Bridge is a new bridge project which began construction in 2015; it will directly connect Highway 401 in Canada to Interstate 75 in the U.S.\n\n"}
{"id": "8937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8937", "title": "Dsungaripterus", "text": "Dsungaripterus\n\nDsungaripterus was a genus of pterosaur, with an average wingspan of . It lived during the Early Cretaceous, in China, where the first fossil was found in the Junggar Basin.\n\n\"Dsungaripterus\" was described in 1964 named by Yang Zhongjian. The genus name combines a reference to the Junggar Basin with a Latinized Greek \"pteron\", \"wing\". The type species is \"Dsungaripterus weii\", the specific name honouring paleontologist C.M. Wei of the Palaeontological Division, Institute of Science, Bureau of Petroleum of Sinkiang. The holotype is IVPP No. V-2776, a partial skull and skeleton. From 1973 more material has been found including almost complete skulls.\n\nIn 1980 Peter Galton renamed \"Pterodactylus brancai\" (Reck 1931), a form from a late Jurassic African formation, into \"Dsungaripterus brancai\", but the identification is now commonly rejected. In 1982 Natasha Bakhurina named a new species, \"Dsungaripterus parvus\", based on a smaller skeleton from Mongolia. Later this was renamed into \"Phobetor\", a preoccupied name, and in 2009 concluded to be identical to \"Noripterus\". In 2002 a \"Dsungaripterus\" wing finger phalanx was reported from Korea.\n\n\"Dsungaripterus weii\" had a wing span of 3 to 3.5 metres (9.8-11.5 ft). Like most dsungaripteroids it had a rather robust skeleton with thick walls and stouty bodily proportions, suggesting a mostly terrestrial lifestyle. The flight style of these animals is unclear, but it was probably punctuated by abrupt landings and extensive flapping.\n\nIts skull, forty to fifty centimetres long, bore a low bone crest that ran down from the base of the skull to halfway to the beak. \"Dsungaripterus\"'s head and neck were together almost a meter long. Its most notable feature are its long, narrow, upcurved jaws with a pointed tip. It had no teeth in the front part of its jaws, which were probably used to remove prey from cracks in rocks or/and the sandy, muddy inland environments it inhabited. It had knobbly flat teeth more to the back of the jaw that were well suited for crushing the armor of shellfish or other hard objects.\n\n\"Dsungaripterus\" was classified by Yang as a member of the Dsungaripteridae. Below is a cladogram showing the phylogenetic placement of \"Dsungaripterus\" within Neoazhdarchia from Andres and Myers (2013).\n\n"}
{"id": "8940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8940", "title": "David Huffman", "text": "David Huffman\n\nDavid Oliver Huffman (May 10, 1945 – February 27, 1985) was an American stage, television and film actor.\n\nHuffman married casting director Phyllis Huffman (\"nee\" Grennan) in 1967. The couple had two sons and remained married until Huffman's death in 1985.\n\nOn the morning February 27, 1985, Huffman was fatally stabbed by a suspected burglar in San Diego. The suspected burglar, a 16-year-old named Genaro Samano Villanueva, had been living in San Diego with family members for approximately five months. He had dropped out of high school but re-enrolled and was due to return to school on February 27. Earlier that morning, Villanueva was taken into custody by police after attempting to steal a radio from a car near his home on India Street. Police released Villanueva into the custody of the vice principal of his high school and told him to return to class. Instead, Villanueva left school and went to Balboa Park where he was spotted by Canadian tourist Jack Beamer. Beamer, his wife and another couple were visiting San Diego and staying in motor homes at the park. Beamer saw Villanueva prowling around inside his friends' motor home and yelled at him causing Villanueva to flee the scene.\n\nAt the time of his death, David Huffman was appearing in the play \"Of Mice and Men\" at the Old Globe Theatre. He had visited the theatre shortly before noon to share cookies with the cast and crew. Huffman was sitting in his van near the theatre playing his bagpipes when he saw Beamer yell at Villanueva. He then gave chase in his vehicle before parking the van near the Spreckels Organ Pavilion and following Villanueva into the park. Huffman eventually caught up with the suspect and the two got into a physical altercation during which Villanueva stabbed Huffman twice in the chest with a screwdriver. Huffman died of exsanguination in 30 to 45 seconds. Huffman's body was found less than an hour later in a gulley in Palm Canyon by a group of children visiting the park on a field trip. As he was not carrying identification at the time of his death, Huffman's body was not positively identified until later that night. Police initially had no leads until the Canadian tourists whose motor home was being burglarized saw Huffman's photo and death announcement in the newspaper several days later and called police.\n\nVillanueva was arrested on March 12 after a police officer recognized Villanueva from a composite sketch given to police by the Canadian tourist. In June 1986, Villanueva was sentenced to 26 years to life in prison for Huffman's murder. Huffman was set to begin work on the television miniseries \"North and South\" the following week. In December 2011, Genaro Villanueva was denied parole for 15 years.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8941", "title": "Dagome iudex", "text": "Dagome iudex\n\nDagome iudex is one of the earliest historical documents relating to Poland. Poland is not mentioned by name, but reference is made to \"Dagome\" and \"Ote\" (Mieszko I and his wife, Oda von Haldensleben) and their sons in 991, placing their land (called \"Schinesghe\") under the protection of the Apostolic See. The document's name derives from its opening words.\n\nThe \"Dagome iudex\" survives only in the form of a summary, completed c. 1080. It was found in a register compiled by a curial \ncardinal during the papacy of Gregory VII.\n\nMost historians believe that the word \"\"Dagome\"\" is a melding of two names: the Christian \"\"Dago,\"\" for \"Dagobert\" (Mieszko's hypothetical baptismal name), and the Slavic \"\"Me,\"\" for \"Mieszko.\" The Latin word \"\"iudex\"\" (\"judge\") would be used in the meaning of \"prince.\" Another interpretation is that \"\"Dagome iudex\"\" is a corruption of \"\"Ego Mesco dux\"\" (\"I, Prince Mieszko\"). In the Vatican copy the e of Dagome might have an \"s adscriptum\" (similar to cedilla), though just the Vatican copyist read \"iudex\" literally, relating it to Sardinia and its four \"judges\". \nPlace names are misspelled by the person who made the summary. He was also apparently unaware that the document related to territory later called Poland.\n\nThe boundaries of the \"Gniezno\" state are described as extending to the \"Long Sea\" (the Baltic), Prussia, Rus', Kraków, Moravia and the Oder River. Lesser Poland is taken account by the mention of its capital, Kraków (\"craccoa\"). Between \"alemura\", probably Olomouc, and Upper Lusatia region of the Milceni (\"terra mileze\") the border could include Silesia if it was straight.\n\nThe text seems to use \"ciuitas schinesghe\" as a synonyme of Greater Poland. Otherwise, the description of the boundaries would be rather more logical, if \"schenisghe\" meant the city of Szczecin. Of other regions and places in Mieszko's territory, it mentions only Kraków and Lusatia, both without \"fines\" (border). Regions outside Mieszko's rule, \"pruzze\" (Prussia) and \"russe\" (Ruthenia), are mentioned with the word \"fines\".\n\nThe \"Dagome iudex\" is of capital importance for Polish history in giving a general description of the future Polish state in that period. It, however, leaves unanswered many questions. First, it does not explain \"why\" Mieszko I placed his state under the protection of the Pope. Also, it is unclear why the document does not mention Mieszko's eldest son, Bolesław I the Brave. Mentioned instead are his sons by his second wife, Oda. No mention is made of the third son from that marriage, Świętopełk, either.\" Finally, Mieszko I is not referred to as \"\"Dagome\"\" in any other document.\n\nHistorians suppose that Bolesław's absence from the document might be explained by an old Slavic custom whereby children received their inheritance as soon as they reached the age of majority. Thus Bolesław the Brave might have received Kraków as his part of his father's legacy before the \"Dagome iudex\" had been written.\n\n\n\nThe following notes are based on interpretations by the Polish historian Gerard Labuda.\n"}
{"id": "8942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8942", "title": "DA", "text": "DA\n\nDa, DA, dA and other variants may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8945", "title": "Derek Walcott", "text": "Derek Walcott\n\nSir Derek Alton Walcott, KCSL, OBE, OCC (23 January 1930 – 17 March 2017) was a Saint Lucian poet and playwright. He received the 1992 Nobel Prize in Literature. He was Professor of Poetry at the University of Essex from 2010 to 2013. His works include the Homeric epic poem \"Omeros\" (1990), which many critics view \"as Walcott's major achievement.\" In addition to winning the Nobel Prize, Walcott received many literary awards over the course of his career, including an Obie Award in 1971 for his play \"Dream on Monkey Mountain\", a MacArthur Foundation \"genius\" award, a Royal Society of Literature Award, the Queen's Medal for Poetry, the inaugural OCM Bocas Prize for Caribbean Literature, the 2011 T. S. Eliot Prize for his book of poetry \"White Egrets\" and the Griffin Trust For Excellence In Poetry Lifetime Recognition Award in 2015.\n\nWalcott was born and raised in Castries, Saint Lucia, in the West Indies, the son of Alix (Maarlin) and Warwick Walcott. He had a twin brother, the playwright Roderick Walcott, and a sister, Pamela Walcott. His family is of English, Dutch and African descent, reflecting the complex colonial history of the island that he explores in his poetry. His mother, a teacher, loved the arts and often recited poetry around the house. His father, who painted and wrote poetry, died at the age of 31 from mastoiditis while his wife was pregnant with the twins Derek and Roderick. Walcott's family was part of a minority Methodist community, who felt overshadowed by the dominant Catholic culture of the island established during French colonial rule.\n\nAs a young man Walcott trained as a painter, mentored by Harold Simmons, whose life as a professional artist provided an inspiring example for him. Walcott greatly admired Cézanne and Giorgione and sought to learn from them. Walcott's painting was later exhibited at the Anita Shapolsky Gallery in New York City, along with the art of other writers, in a 2007 exhibition named \"The Writer's Brush: Paintings and Drawing by Writers\".\n\nHe studied as a writer, becoming “an elated, exuberant poet madly in love with English” and strongly influenced by modernist poets such as T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound. Walcott had an early sense of a vocation as a writer. In the poem \"Midsummer\" (1984), he wrote: \n<poem>\n</poem>\nAt 14, Walcott published his first poem, a Miltonic, religious poem, in the newspaper \"The Voice of St Lucia\". An English Catholic priest condemned the Methodist-inspired poem as blasphemous in a response printed in the newspaper. By 19, Walcott had self-published his first two collections with the aid of his mother, who paid for the printing: \"25 Poems\" (1948) and \"Epitaph for the Young: XII Cantos\" (1949). He sold copies to his friends and covered the costs. He later commented, \"I went to my mother and said, 'I’d like to publish a book of poems, and I think it’s going to cost me two hundred dollars.' She was just a seamstress and a schoolteacher, and I remember her being very upset because she wanted to do it. Somehow she got it—a lot of money for a woman to have found on her salary. She gave it to me, and I sent off to Trinidad and had the book printed. When the books came back I would sell them to friends. I made the money back.\"The influential Bajan poet Frank Collymore critically supported Walcott's early work.\n\nWith a scholarship, he studied at the University College of the West Indies in Kingston, Jamaica.\n\nAfter graduation, Walcott moved to Trinidad in 1953, where he became a critic, teacher and journalist. He founded the Trinidad Theatre Workshop in 1959 and remained active with its Board of Directors.\n\nExploring the Caribbean and its history in a colonialist and post-colonialist context, his collection \"In a Green Night: Poems 1948–1960\" (1962) attracted international attention. His play \"Dream on Monkey Mountain\" (1970) was produced on NBC-TV in the United States the year it was published. In 1971 it was produced by the Negro Ensemble Company off-Broadway in New York City; it won an Obie Award that year for \"Best Foreign Play\". The following year, Walcott won an OBE from the British government for his work.\n\nHe was hired as a teacher by Boston University in the United States, where he founded the Boston Playwrights' Theatre in 1981. That year he also received a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in the United States. Walcott taught literature and writing at Boston University for more than two decades, publishing new books of poetry and plays on a regular basis. Walcott retired from his position at Boston University in 2007. He became friends with other poets, including the Russian expatriate Joseph Brodsky, who lived and worked in the U.S. after being exiled in the 1970s, and the Irishman Seamus Heaney, who also taught in Boston.\n\nHis epic poem \"Omeros\" (1990), which loosely echoes and refers to characters from the \"Iliad\", has been critically praised \"as Walcott's major achievement.\" The book received praise from publications such as \"The Washington Post\" and \"The New York Times Book Review\", which chose \"Omeros\" as one of its \"Best Books of 1990\".\n\nWalcott was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1992, the second Caribbean writer to receive the honour after Saint-John Perse, who was born in Guadeloupe, received the award in 1960. The Nobel committee described Walcott's work as \"a poetic oeuvre of great luminosity, sustained by a historical vision, the outcome of a multicultural commitment\". He won an Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for Lifetime Achievement in 2004.\n\nHis later poetry collections include \"Tiepolo’s Hound\" (2000), illustrated with copies of his watercolors; \"The Prodigal\" (2004), and \"White Egrets\" (2010), which received the T.S. Eliot Prize and the 2011 OCM Bocas Prize for Caribbean Literature.\n\nIn 2009, Walcott began a three-year distinguished scholar-in-residence position at the University of Alberta. In 2010, he became Professor of Poetry at the University of Essex.\n\nAs a part of St Lucia's Independence Day celebrations, in February 2016, he became one of the first knights of the Order of Saint Lucia.\n\nIn 1982 a Harvard sophomore accused Walcott of sexual harassment in September 1981. She alleged that after she refused, she was given the only C in the class. In 1996 a student at Boston University sued Walcott for sexual harassment and \"offensive sexual physical contact\". The two reached a settlement.\n\nIn 2009, Walcott was a leading candidate for the position of Oxford Professor of Poetry. He withdrew his candidacy after reports of the accusations against him of sexual harassment from 1981 and 1996.\n\nWhen the media learned that pages from an American book on the topic were sent anonymously to a number of Oxford academics, this aroused their interest in the university decisions.\n\nRuth Padel, also a leading candidate, was elected to the post. Within days, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that she had alerted journalists to the harassment cases. Under severe media and academic pressure, Padel resigned. Padel was the first woman to be elected to the Oxford post, and journalists including Libby Purves, Yasmin Alibhai-Brown, the American Macy Halford and the Canadian Suzanne Gardner attributed the criticism of her to misogyny and a gender war at Oxford. They said that a male poet would not have been so criticized, as she had reported published information, not rumour.\n\nNumerous respected poets, including Seamus Heaney and Al Alvarez, published a letter of support for Walcott in \"The Times Literary Supplement,\" and criticized the press furore. Other commentators suggested that both poets were casualties of the media interest in an internal university affair, because the story \"had everything, from sex claims to allegations of character assassination\". Simon Armitage and other poets expressed regret at Padel's resignation.\n\nMethodism and spirituality have played a significant role from the beginning in Walcott's work. He commented, \"I have never separated the writing of poetry from prayer. I have grown up believing it is a vocation, a religious vocation.\" Describing his writing process, he wrote, \"the body feels it is melting into what it has seen… the 'I' not being important. That is the ecstasy...Ultimately, it’s what Yeats says: 'Such a sweetness flows into the breast that we laugh at everything and everything we look upon is blessed.' That’s always there. It’s a benediction, a transference. It’s gratitude, really. The more of that a poet keeps, the more genuine his nature.\" He also notes, \"if one thinks a poem is coming on...you do make a retreat, a withdrawal into some kind of silence that cuts out everything around you. What you’re taking on is really not a renewal of your identity but actually a renewal of your anonymity.\"\n\nWalcott said his writing was influenced by the work of the American poets, Robert Lowell and Elizabeth Bishop, who were also friends.\n\nHe published more than twenty plays, the majority of which have been produced by the Trinidad Theatre Workshop and have also been widely staged elsewhere. Many of them address, either directly or indirectly, the liminal status of the West Indies in the post-colonial period. Through poetry he also explores the paradoxes and complexities of this legacy.\n\nIn his 1970 essay \"What the Twilight Says: An Overture\", discussing art and theatre in his native region (from \"Dream on Monkey Mountain and Other Plays\"), Walcott reflects on the West Indies as colonized space. He discusses the problems for an artist of a region with little in the way of truly indigenous forms, and with little national or nationalist identity. He states: “We are all strangers here... Our bodies think in one language and move in another\". The epistemological effects of colonization inform plays such as \"Ti-Jean and his Brothers\". Mi-Jean, one of the eponymous brothers, is shown to have much information, but to truly know nothing. Every line Mi-Jean recites is rote knowledge gained from the coloniser; he is unable to synthesize it or apply it to his life as a colonised person.\n\nWalcott notes of growing up in West Indian culture:\"What we were deprived of was also our privilege. There was a great joy in making a world that so far, up to then, had been undefined... My generation of West Indian writers has felt such a powerful elation at having the privilege of writing about places and people for the first time and, simultaneously, having behind them the tradition of knowing how well it can be done—by a Defoe, a Dickens, a Richardson.\"Walcott identified as \"absolutely a Caribbean writer\", a pioneer, helping to make sense of the legacy of deep colonial damage. In such poems as \"The Castaway\" (1965) and in the play \"Pantomime\" (1978), he uses the metaphors of shipwreck and Crusoe to describe the culture and what is required of artists after colonialism and slavery: both the freedom and the challenge to begin again, salvage the best of other cultures and make something new. These images recur in later work as well. He writes, \"If we continue to sulk and say, Look at what the slave-owner did, and so forth, we will never mature. While we sit moping or writing morose poems and novels that glorify a non-existent past, then time passes us by.\"\n\nWalcott's epic book-length poem \"Omeros\" was published in 1990 to critical acclaim. The poem very loosely echoes and references Homer and some of his major characters from \"The Iliad\". Some of the poem's major characters include the island fishermen Achille and Hector, the retired English officer Major Plunkett and his wife Maud, the housemaid Helen, the blind man Seven Seas (who symbolically represents Homer), and the author himself.\n\nAlthough the main narrative of the poem takes place on the island of St. Lucia, where Walcott was born and raised, Walcott also includes scenes from Brookline, Massachusetts (where Walcott was living and teaching at the time of the poem's composition), and the character Achille imagines a voyage from Africa onto a slave ship that is headed for the Americas; also, in Book Five of the poem, Walcott narrates some of his travel experiences in a variety of cities around the world, including Lisbon, London, Dublin, Rome, and Toronto.\nComposed in a variation on \"terza rima\", the work explores the themes that run throughout Walcott's oeuvre: the beauty of the islands, the colonial burden, the fragmentation of Caribbean identity, and the role of the poet in a post-colonial world.\n\nWalcott's work has received praise from major poets including Robert Graves, who wrote that Walcott \"handles English with a closer understanding of its inner magic than most, if not any, of his contemporaries\", and Joseph Brodsky, who praised Walcott's work, writing: \"For almost forty years his throbbing and relentless lines kept arriving in the English language like tidal waves, coagulating into an archipelago of poems without which the map of modern literature would effectively match wallpaper. He gives us more than himself or 'a world'; he gives us a sense of infinity embodied in the language.\" Walcott noted that he, Brodsky, and the Irish poet Seamus Heaney, who all taught in the United States, were a band of poets \"outside the American experience\".\n\nThe poetry critic William Logan critiqued Walcott's work in a \"New York Times\" book review of Walcott's \"Selected Poems\". While he praised Walcott's writing in \"Sea Grapes\" and \"The Arkansas Testament\", Logan had mostly negative things to say about Walcott's poetry, calling \"Omeros\" \"clumsy\" and \"Another Life\" \"pretentious.\" Finally, he concluded with the faint praise that \"No living poet has written verse more delicately rendered or distinguished than Walcott, though few individual poems seem destined to be remembered.\"\n\nMost reviews of Walcott's work are more positive. For instance, in \"The New Yorker\" review of \"The Poetry of Derek Walcott\", Adam Kirsch had high praise for Walcott's oeuvre, describing his style in the following manner:\n\nBy combining the grammar of vision with the freedom of metaphor, Walcott produces a beautiful style that is also a philosophical style. People perceive the world on dual channels, Walcott’s verse suggests, through the senses and through the mind, and each is constantly seeping into the other. The result is a state of perpetual magical thinking, a kind of \"Alice in Wonderland\" world where concepts have bodies and landscapes are always liable to get up and start talking.\n\nKirsch calls \"Another Life\" Walcott's \"first major peak\" and analyzes the painterly qualities of Walcott's imagery from his earliest work through to later books like \"Tiepolo's Hound\". He also explores the post-colonial politics in Walcott's work, calling him \"the postcolonial writer par excellence.\" He calls the early poem \"A Far Cry from Africa\" a turning point in Walcott's development as a poet. Like Logan, Kirsch is critical of \"Omeros\" which he believes Walcott fails to successfully sustain over its entirety. Although \"Omeros\" is the volume of Walcott's that usually receives the most critical praise, Kirsch believes that \"Midsummer\" is his best book.\n\nHis poetry, as spoken performance, appears briefly in the sampled sounds in the music album of the group Dreadzone. Their track entitled 'Captain Dread' from the album 'Second Light' incorporates the fourth verse of Walcott's 1990 poem 'The Schooner Flight'.\n\nIn 2013 Dutch filmmaker Ida Does released “Poetry is an Island”, a feature documentary film about Derek Walcott's life and the ever present influence of his birthplace of St Lucia.\n\nThe Fall 2016 online edition of Rain Taxi featured an extensive interview with Walcott.\n\nIn 1954 Walcott married Fay Moston, a secretary, but the marriage ended in divorce in 1959. They had a son, the St Lucian painter Peter Walcott. Walcott married a second time to Margaret Maillard in 1962, who worked as an almoner in a hospital, and together they had two daughters, Elizabeth, and Anna; they divorced in 1976. In 1976, Walcott married for a third time, to actress Norline Metivier (divorced in 1993). He was survived by his longtime companion, Sigrid Nama, a former art gallery owner.\n\nWalcott was also known for his passion for travelling to countries around the world. He split his time between New York, Boston, and St. Lucia, and incorporated the influences of different areas into his pieces of work.\n\nWalcott died at his home in Cap Estate, St. Lucia, on 17 March 2017. He was 87. He was given a state funeral on Saturday, 25 March, with a service at the Cathedral Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in Castries and burial at Morne Fortune.\n\n\nIn 1993, a public square and park located in central Castries, Saint Lucia, was named Derek Walcott Square.\n\nThe Saint Lucia National Trust acquired Walcott's childhood home at 17 Chaussée Road, Castries, in November 2015, renovating it before opening it to the public as Walcott House in January 2016.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8946", "title": "Decipherment", "text": "Decipherment\n\nIn philology, decipherment is the discovery of the meaning of texts written in ancient or obscure languages or scripts. Decipherment in cryptography refers to decryption. The term is used sardonically in everyday language to describe attempts to read poor handwriting. In genetics, decipherment is the successful attempt to understand DNA, which is viewed metaphorically as a text containing word-like units. Throughout science the term decipherment is synonymous with the understanding of biological and chemical phenomena.\n\nIn many cases, a multilingual artifact is necessary to facilitate decipherment, the Rosetta Stone being the classic example. Statistical techniques provide another pathway to decipherment, as does the analysis of modern languages derived from ancient languages in which undeciphered texts are written. Archaeological and historical information is helpful in verifying hypothesized decipherments. \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8949", "title": "Decca Navigator System", "text": "Decca Navigator System\n\nThe Decca Navigator System was a hyperbolic radio navigation system which allowed ships and aircraft to determine their position by receiving radio signals from fixed navigational beacons. The system used phase comparison of low frequencies from 70 to 129 kHz, as opposed to pulse timing systems like Gee and LORAN. This made it much easier to implement the receivers using 1940s electronics.\n\nThe system was invented in the US, but development was carried out by Decca in the UK. It was first deployed by the Royal Navy during World War II when the Allied forces needed a system which could be used to achieve accurate landings and was not known to the Germans and thus free of jamming. After the war it was extensively developed around the UK and later used in many areas around the world. Decca's primary use was for ship navigation in coastal waters, offering much better accuracy than the competing LORAN system. Fishing vessels were major post-war users, but it was also used on aircraft, including a very early (1949) application of moving map displays. The system was deployed extensively in the North Sea and was used by helicopters operating to oil platforms.\n\nThe opening of the more accurate Loran-C system to civilian use in 1974 offered stiff competition, but Decca was well established by this time and continued operations into the 1990s. Decca was eventually replaced, along with Loran and other similar systems, by the GPS during the 1990s. The Decca system in Europe was shut down in the spring of 2000, and the last worldwide chain, in Japan, in 2001.\n\nThe Decca Navigator System consisted of a number of land-based radio beacons organised into \"chains\". Each chain consisted of a master station and three (occasionally two) secondary stations, termed Red, Green and Purple. Ideally, the secondaries would be positioned at the vertices of an equilateral triangle with the master at the centre. The baseline length, that is, the master-secondary distance, was typically .\n\nEach station transmitted a continuous wave signal that, by comparing the phase difference of the signals from the master and one of the secondaries, resulted in a set of hyperbolic \"lines of position\" called a \"pattern\". As there were three secondaries there were three patterns, termed Red, Green and Purple. The patterns were drawn on nautical charts as a set of hyperbolic lines in the appropriate colour. Receivers identified which hyperbola they were on and a position could be plotted at the intersection of the hyperbola from different patterns, usually by using the pair with the angle of cut closest to orthogonal as possible.\n\nWhen two stations transmit at the phase-locked frequency, the difference in phase between the two signals is constant along a hyperbolic path. Of course, if two stations transmit on the same frequency, it is practically impossible for the receiver to separate them; so instead of all stations transmitting at the same frequency, each chain was allocated a nominal frequency, 1f, and each station in the chain transmitted at a harmonic of this base frequency, as follows:\n\nThe frequencies given are those for Chain 5B, known as the English Chain, but all chains used similar frequencies between 70 kHz and 129 kHz.\n\nDecca receivers multiplied the signals received from the Master and each Slave by different values to arrive at a common frequency (least common multiple, LCM) for each Master/Slave pair, as follows:\n\nIt was phase comparison at this common frequency that resulted in the hyperbolic lines of position. The interval between two adjacent hyperbolas on which the signals are in phase was called a \"lane\". Since the wavelength of the common frequency was small compared with the distance between the Master and Slave stations there were many possible lines of position for a given phase difference, and so a unique position could not be arrived at by this method.\n\nOther receivers, typically for aeronautical applications, divided the transmitted frequencies down to the basic frequency (1f) for phase comparison, rather than multiplying them up to the LCM frequency.\n\nEarly Decca receivers were fitted with three rotating \"Decometers\" that indicated the phase difference for each pattern. Each Decometer drove a second indicator that counted the number of lanes traversed – each 360 degrees of phase difference was one lane traversed. In this way, assuming the point of departure was known, a more or less distinct location could be identified.\n\nThe lanes were grouped into \"zones\", with 18 green, 24 red, or 30 purple lanes in each zone. This meant that on the baseline (the straight line between the Master and its Slave) the zone width was the same for all three patterns of a given chain. Typical lane and zone widths on the baseline are shown in the table below (for chain 5B):\n\nThe lanes were numbered 0 to 23 for red, 30 to 47 for green and 50 to 79 for purple. The zones were labelled A to J, repeating after J. A Decca position coordinate could thus be written: Red I 16.30; Green D 35.80. Later receivers incorporated a microprocessor and displayed a position in latitude and longitude.\n\n\"Multipulse\" provided an automatic method of lane and zone identification by using the same phase comparison techniques described above on lower frequency signals.\n\nThe nominally continuous wave transmissions were in fact divided into a 20-second cycle, with each station in turn simultaneously transmitting all four Decca frequencies (5f, 6f, 8f and 9f) in a phase-coherent relationship for a brief period of 0.45 seconds each cycle. This transmission, known as Multipulse, allowed the receiver to extract the 1f frequency and so to identify which lane the receiver was in (to a resolution of a zone).\n\nAs well as transmitting the Decca frequencies of 5f, 6f, 8f and 9f, an 8.2f signal, known as Orange, was also transmitted. The beat frequency between the 8.0f (Red) and 8.2f (Orange) signals allowed a 0.2f signal to be derived and so resulted in a hyperbolic pattern in which one cycle (360°) of phase difference equates to 5 zones.\n\nAssuming that one’s position was known to this accuracy, this gave an effectively unique position.\n\nDuring daylight, ranges of around could be obtained, reducing at night to 200 to , depending on propagation conditions.\n\nThe accuracy depended on:\n\nBy day these errors could range from a few meters on the baseline up to a nautical mile at the edge of coverage. At night, skywave errors were greater and, on receivers without multipulse capabilities, it was not unusual for the position to jump a lane, sometimes without the navigator knowing.\n\nAlthough in the days of differential GPS this range and accuracy may appear poor, in its day the Decca system was one of the few, if not the only, position fixing system available to many mariners. Since the need for an accurate position is less when the vessel is further from land, the reduced accuracy at long ranges was not a great problem.\n\nIn 1936 William J. O'Brien, an engineer, contracted tuberculosis which put his career on hold for a period of two years. During this period he had the idea of position fixing by means of phase comparison of continuous wave transmissions. This was not the first such system, but O'Brien apparently developed his version without knowledge of the others, and made several advancements in the art that would prove useful. He initially imagined the system being used for aircraft testing, specifically the accurate calculation of ground speed. Some experiments were carried out in California in 1938, selecting frequencies with harmonic \"beats\" that would allow for station identification in a network of transmitters. Both the US Army and Navy considered the idea too complicated and work ended in 1939.\n\nO’Brien's friend, Harvey F. Schwarz, was chief engineer of the Decca Record company in England. In 1939 O’Brien sent him details of the system so it could be put forward to the British military. Initially Robert Watson-Watt reviewed the system but he did not follow it up, deeming it too easily jammed (and likely due to the existing work on the Gee system, being carried out by Watt's group). However, in October 1941 the British Admiralty Signal Establishment (ASE) became interested in the system, which was then classified as \"Admiralty Outfit QM\". O’Brien brought the Californian equipment to the UK and conducted the first marine trials between Anglesey and the Isle of Man, at frequencies of 305/610 kHz, on 16 September 1942.\n\nFurther trials were conducted in the northern Irish Sea in April 1943 at 70/130 kHz. It was decided that the original frequencies were not ideal, and a new system using a 14 kHz inter-signal spacing was selected. This led to the common 5, 6, 8 and 9\"f\" frequencies, used throughout the life of the Decca system. 7\"f\" was reserved for a Loran-C-like extension, but never developed. A follow-up test was carried out in the Irish Sea in January 1944 to test a wide variety of upgrades and production equipment. By this time the competing Gee system was known to the Admiralty and the two systems were tested head-to-head under the code names QM and QH. QM was found to have better sea-level range and accuracy, which led to its adoption.\n\nA three-station trial was held in conjunction with a large-scale assault and landing exercise in the Moray Firth in February/March 1944. The success of the trials and the relative ease of use and accuracy of the system resulted in Decca receiving an order for 27 \"Admiralty Outfit QM\" receivers. The receiver consisted of an electronics unit with two dials and was known to its operators as the \"Blue Gasmeter Job\". A Decca chain was set up, consisting of a master station at Chichester and slaves at Swanage and Beachy Head. A fourth decoy transmitter was located in the Thames Estuary as part of the deception that the invasion would be focussed on the Calais area.\n\n21 minesweepers and other vessels were fitted with \"Admiralty Outfit QM\" and, on 5 June 1944, 17 of these ships used it to accurately navigate across the English Channel and to sweep the minefields in the planned areas. The swept areas were marked with buoys in preparation for the Normandy Landings.\n\nAfter the initial ship tests, Decca conducted tests in cars, driving in the Kingston By-Pass area to verify receiver accuracy. In the car installation, it was found possible to navigate within an individual traffic lane. The company entertained high hopes that the system could be used in aircraft, to permit much more precise navigation in the critical airspace around airports and urban centres where traffic density was highest.\n\nAfter the end of World War II the Decca Navigator Co. Ltd. was formed (1945) and the system expanded rapidly, particularly in areas of British influence; at its peak it was deployed in many of the world's major shipping areas. More than 15,000 receiving sets were in use aboard ships in 1970. There were 4 chains around England, 1 in Ireland and 2 in Scotland, 12 in Scandinavia (5 each in Norway and Sweden and 1 each in Denmark and Finland), a further 4 elsewhere in northern Europe and 2 in Spain.\n\nIn the late 1950s an experimental Decca chain was set up in the United States, in the New York area, to be used for navigating the Vertol 107 helicopters of New York Airways. These helicopters were operating from the principal local airports—John F. Kennedy Airport on Long Island, Newark Airport in New Jersey, LaGuardia Airport in the Borough of Queens, nearer to Manhattan, and a site on the top of the (then) PanAm Building on Park Avenue. Use of Decca was essential because its signals could be received down to sea level, were not subject to the line-of-sight limitations of VOR/DME and did not suffer the slant-range errors that create problems with VOR/DME close to the transmitters. The Decca installations in the New York Airways helicopters included the unique Decca 'roller map' displays that enabled the pilot to see his or her position at a glance, a concept infeasible with VOR/DME.\n\nThis chain installation was considered highly controversial at the time, for political reasons. This led to the U.S. Coast Guard, under instructions from the Treasury Department to which it reported, banning the use of Decca receivers in ships entering New York harbour for fear that the system might create a de facto standard (as it had become in other areas of the world). It also served to protect the marketing interests of the Hoffman Electronics division of ITT, a principal supplier of VOR/DME systems, that Decca might have been poised to usurp.\n\nThis situation was exacerbated by the workload problems of the Air Traffic Controllers Association (ATCA), under its executive director Francis McDermott, whose members were forced to use radar data on aircraft positions, relaying those positions by radio to the aircraft from their control locations. An example of the problem, cited by experts, was the collision of a Douglas DC8 and a Lockheed Constellation over Staten Island, New York, that—according to some experts—could have been avoided if the aircraft had been Decca-equipped and could not only have determined their positions more precisely but would not have suffered from the rho-theta position errors inherent in VOR/DME.\n\nOther chains were established in Japan (6 chains); Namibia and South Africa (5 chains); India and Bangladesh (4 chains); Canada (4 chains around Newfoundland and Nova Scotia); North-West Australia (2 chains); the Persian Gulf (1 chain with stations in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates and a second chain in the north of the Gulf with stations in Iran) and the Bahamas (1 chain). Four chains were planned for Nigeria but only 2 chains were built and these did not enter into public service. Two chains in Vietnam were used during the Vietnam War for helicopter navigation, with limited success.\nDuring the Cold War period, following WWII, the R.A.F. established a confidential chain in Germany. The Master station was in Bad Iburg near Osnabrück and there were two Slaves. The purpose of this chain was to provide accurate air navigation for the corridor between Western Germany and Berlin in the event that a mass evacuation of allied personnel may be required. In order to maintain secrecy, frequencies were changed at irregular intervals.\n\nThe headquarters of Decca Navigator were at New Malden, Surrey, just off the Kingston by-pass. There was a Decca School, at Brixham, Devon, where employees were sent on courses from time to time. Racal, the UK weapons and communications company, acquired Decca in 1980. Merging Decca's radar assets with their own, Racal began selling off the other portions of the company, including avionics and Decca Navigator.\n\nA significant amount of income from the Decca system was due to the receivers being leased to users, not sold outright. This guaranteed predictable annual income. When the patents on the original technology lapsed in the early 1980s, new receivers were quickly built by a number of companies. In particular, Aktieselskabet Dansk Philips ('Danish Philips', \"ap\") introduced receivers that could be purchased outright, and were much smaller and easier to use than the current Decca counterparts. The \"ap\" versions directly output the longitude and latitude to two decimals (originally in datum ED50 only) instead of using the \"deco meter\" displays, offering accuracy better than ±9.3 m, much better than the Decca units. This also eliminated the need for the special charts printed with Decca lanes and zones.\n\nDecca sued ap for infringement and, in the ensuing court battle, Decca lost the monopoly. That signalled the beginning of the end for the company. Income dwindled and eventually, the UK Ministry of Transport stepped in, having the lighthouse authorities take responsibility for operating the system in the early 1990s.\n\nA ruling from the European Union forced the UK government to withdraw funding. The general lighthouse authority ceased Decca transmissions at midnight on 31 March 2000. The Irish chain provided by Bórd Iascaigh Mhara continued transmitting until 19 May 2000. Japan continued operating their Hokkaidō chain until March 2001, the last Decca chain in operation.\n\nIn the immediate post-war era, Decca began studying a long-range system like Decca, but using much lower frequencies to enable reception of skywaves at long distances. In February 1946 the company proposed a system with two main stations located at Shannon Airport in Ireland and Gander International Airport in Newfoundland (today part of Canada). Together, these stations would provide navigation over the main great circle route between London and New York. A third station in Bermuda would provide general ranging information to measure progress along the main track.\n\nWork on this concept continued, and in 1951 a modified version was presented that offered navigation over very wide areas. This was known as Delrac, short for \"Decca Long Range Area Cover\". A further development, including features of the General Post Office's POPI system, was introduced in 1954, proposing 28 stations that provided worldwide coverage. The system was predicted to offer accuracy at range 95% of the time. Further development was ended in favour of the Dectra system.\n\nIn the early 1960s the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA), as part of a wider ICAO effort, began the process of introducing a standard long-range radio navigation system for aviation use. Decca proposed a system that could offer both high-accuracy at short ranges and trans-Atlantic navigation with less accuracy, using a single receiver. The system was known as Dectra, short for \"Decca Track\".\n\nUnlike the Delrac system, Dectra was essentially the normal Decca Navigator system with the modification of several existing transmitter sites. These were located at the East Newfoundland and Scottish chains, which were equipped with larger antennas and high-power transmitters, broadcasting 20 times as much energy as normal chain stations. Given that the length of the chain baselines did not change, and were relatively short, at long distance the signal offered almost no accuracy. Instead, Dectra operated as a track system; aircraft would navigate by keeping themselves within the signal defined by a particular Decca lane.\n\nThe main advantage of Dectra compared to other systems being proposed for the RTCA solution was that it could be used for both medium-range navigation over land, as well as long-range navigation over the Altlantic. In comparison, the VOR/DME system that ultimately won the competition offered navigation over perhaps a 200 mile radius, and could not offer a solution to the long-distance problem. Additionally, as the Decca system provided an X and Y location, as opposed to the angle-and-range VOR/DME, Decca proposed offering it with their Decca Flight Log moving map display to further improve ease of navigation. In spite of these advantages, the RTCA ultimately chose VOR/DME for two primary reasons; VOR offered coverage over about the same range as Decca, about 200 miles, but did so with a single transmitter instead of Decca's four, and Decca's frequencies proved susceptible to interference from static due to lightning, while VOR's higher frequencies were not quite as sensitive.\n\nDecca continued to propose that Dectra be used for the long-range role. In 1967 they installed another transmitter in Iceland to provide ranging along the Scotland-Newfoundland track, with a second proposed to be installed on the Azores. They also installed Dectra receivers with Omnitrac computers and a lightweight version of the Flight Log on a number of commercial airliners, notably a BOAC Vickers VC10. The Omnitrac could take inputs from Decca (and Dectra), Loran-C, VOR/DME, an air data computer and doppler radars and combine them all to produce a lat/long output along with bearing, distance-to-go, bearing and an autopilot coupling. Their efforts to standardize this were eventually abandoned as inertial navigation systems began to be installed for these needs.\n\nA more accurate system named Hi-Fix was developed using signalling in the 1.6 MHz range. It was used for specialised applications such as precision measurements involved with oil-drilling and by the Royal Navy for detailed mapping and surveying of coasts and harbours. The Hi-Fix equipment was leased for a period with temporary chains established to provide coverage of the area required, Hi-Fix was commercialised by Racal Survey in the early 1980s. An experimental chain was installed with coverage of central London and receivers placed in London buses and other vehicles to demonstrate an early vehicle location and tracking system. Each vehicle would report its location automatically via a conventional VHF two-way radio link, the data added to a voice channel. A forerunner to a system employed by London black cabs in the 1990s using GPS and now the widespread use of GSM, 3G and Wi-Fi geolocation applications.\n\nAnother application was developed by the Bendix Pacific division of Bendix Corporation, with offices in North Hollywood, California, but not deployed: PFNS—Personal Field Navigation System—that would enable individual soldiers to ascertain their geographic position, long before this capability was made possible by the satellite-based GPS (Global Positioning System).\n\nA further application of the Decca system was implemented by the U.S. Navy in the late 1950s and early 1960s for use in the Tongue of the Ocean/Eleuthera Sound area near The Bahamas, separating the islands of Andros and New Providence. The application was for sonar studies made possible by the unique characteristics of the ocean floor.\n\nAn interesting characteristic of the Decca VLF signal discovered on BOAC, later British Airways, test flights to Moscow, was that the carrier switching could not be detected even though the carrier could be received with sufficient strength to provide navigation. Such testing, involving civilian aircraft, is quite common and may well not be in the knowledge of a pilot.\n\nThe 'low frequency' signalling of the Decca system also permitted its use on submarines. One 'enhancement' of the Decca system was to offer the potential of keying the signal, using Morse code, to signal the onset of nuclear war. This option was never taken up by the UK government. Messages were clandestinely sent, however, between Decca stations thereby bypassing international telephone calls, especially in non-UK chains.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "8953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8953", "title": "Dana Rohrabacher", "text": "Dana Rohrabacher\n\nDana Tyrone Rohrabacher (born June 21, 1947) is a member of the U.S House of Representatives representing . A Republican, he served as a speechwriter and Special Assistant to President Ronald Reagan from 1981 to 1988.\n\nIn terms of his positions, Rohrabacher voted to repeal Obamacare, denies man-made global warming, is a staunch opponent of illegal immigration, and favors the legalization of marijuana. In foreign policy, he supported withdrawing U.S. troops from Afghanistan, called for Trump to punish Turkish President Erdoğan on embassy violence, sided with Russia in the Russia–Georgia war, gave a qualified defense of the annexation of Crimea in 2014 and supports cooperating with Russia in Syria. Although he later insisted he was joking, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy was overheard saying, \"There's two people I think Putin pays: Rohrabacher and [Donald] Trump. Swear to God.\" He was warned in 2012 by the FBI that Russian spies may have been trying to recruit him to act on Russia's behalf, after he met with a member of the Russian foreign ministry privately in Moscow. Following the ISIS terrorist attacks in Tehran on June 7th, 2017, in which 17 innocent civilians were killed, he suggested that the attack could be viewed as ‘a good thing', and surmised that President Trump might have been behind the coordination of this terrorist attack. An article in \"The Atlantic\" suggested that there was serious concern in the State Department of ties between Rohrabacher and the Russian government.\n\nPrior to working in the Reagan Administration, Rohrabacher served as assistant press secretary to Ronald Reagan during his 1976 and 1980 presidential campaigns. During his tenure at the White House, Rohrabacher played a leading role in the formulation of the Reagan Doctrine. He also helped formulate President Reagan's Economic Bill of Rights, which was a series of policy proposals that Reagan introduced in a speech at the Jefferson Memorial.\n\nRohrabacher, who is of German and English descent, was born June 21, 1947, in Coronado, California, the son of Doris M. (née Haring) and Donald Tyler Rohrabacher. Rohrabacher has a long history in Orange County. He attended elementary school locally, and during his college years, he lived in Sunset Beach.\nRohrabacher graduated from Palos Verdes High School in Palos Verdes Estates, California, attended Los Angeles Harbor College, and earned a bachelor's degree in history at California State University, Long Beach in 1969. He received his master's degree in American Studies at the University of Southern California.\nWhile in graduate school and during the early 1970s, he had a side activity as a folk singer. He was also a writer for the Orange County Register. During this time he was considered a free-market anarchist and libertarian activist after his previous membership in Young Americans for Freedom. Libertarian author Samuel Konkin recalled:\n\nRohrabacher left the Reagan administration in 1988 to pursue the open House seat recently vacated by Dan Lungren. With the fundraising help of friend Oliver North, Rohrabacher was able to win the Republican primary with a plurality of 35%. He won the general election with 64%. He only had serious primary competition twice, in 1992 and 1998. After redistricting, he won a three candidate primary election in 1992 with a plurality of 48%. In 1998, he won an open primary with 54% of the vote. As far as general elections, he only dipped below 55.0% once (2008).\n\n\nHe defeated Democratic nominee Debbie Cook, Mayor of Huntington Beach, 53%–43%, the lowest winning percentage of Rohrabacher's career.\n\n\nHe defeated Democratic nominee Ken Arnold 62%–38%.\n\nAfter redistricting, he announced that he would run in the newly redrawn California's 48th congressional district. He said \"The new 48th District is a good fit and something that will enable me to serve my constituents and the country well.\" He won re-election in this Orange County district with 61% of the vote.\n\n\nRohrabacher won reelection with 64.1% of the vote.\n\n\nRohrabacher won reelection with 58.3% of the vote.\n\nA friend and fellow White House aide, Christopher Cox, won a southern Orange County seat in the same election.\n\nIn 2011, Rohrabacher voted against the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 as part of a controversial provision that allows the government and the military to indefinitely detain American citizens and others without trial.\n\nDuring a trip to Iraq in June 2011, he said that Iraq should pay back the U.S. for all the money it had spent since the invasion, when it becomes a wealthy country. Rohrabacher also commented he would be holding a hearing with the Sub-Committee on Oversight and Investigations into if Iraq committed \"crimes against humanity\" at Camp Ashraf when a massacre occurred last April. The incident left 34 residents killed and over 300 wounded. The delegation was denied access to the camp by Iraqi government, citing their sovereignty. Rohrabacher's delegation was subsequently asked to leave the country.\n\nOn November 4, 2005, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that Rohrabacher was paid 23,000 dollars for a thirty-year-old screen play of his. At issue was whether the producer paid him for the screenplay or for the introductions to congressional and federal officials. Rohrabacher said that the introductions were made in good faith, were nothing that was not done regularly for legitimate causes, and that the introductions have only become an issue because of Joseph Medawar's alleged misdeeds.\n\nIn May 2006, Rohrabacher announced through his press secretary that he would return the $23,000. The decision was made public shortly before Medawar took responsibility in a United States District Court for bilking $3.4 million from about 50 investors.\n\nIn a debate at Orange Coast College, he voiced his support for Proposition 8, which defines marriage in California as only between a man and a woman, and said that he \"would suggest not changing the definition of marriage in our society to make a small number of people feel more comfortable.\"\n\nIn February 2017, Rohrabacher faced criticism for refusing to meet with constituents that showed up at his local Huntington Beach office. The constituents were upset with his support of President Donald Trump. Police were called to remove the constituents.\n\n\nRohrabacher chaired the Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee of the House Science Committee from 1997 until January 2005; he received a two-year waiver to serve beyond the six-year term limit.\n\nAs a senior member of the International Relations Committee, Rohrabacher led the effort to deny Most Favored Nation trading status to the People's Republic of China, citing that nation's dismal human rights record and opposition to democracy. His subcommittee assignments are East Asia and Pacific, and Middle East and South Asia.\n\n\nOn May 4, 2017, he voted in favor of repealing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) and pass the American Health Care Act.\n\nRohrabacher is an opponent of the America Invents Act, a bill that is attempting to change the current Patent System. Rohrabacher opposes changing from a \"first to invent system\" to a \"first to file system\" saying it \"hurts the little guy.\" Rohrabacher commented \"Make no mistake, 'first to file' weakens patent protection. It is likely to make vulnerable individual and small inventors, who don't have an army of lawyers on retainer. These 'little guys' have been the lifeblood of American progress and competitiveness for more than 200 years. Our system was designed to protect individual rights, and it has worked for all – not just the corporate elite.\" Rohrabacher went on to comment in a \"Politico\" op-ed, \"We're told this is necessary to harmonize with Japanese and European patent law. But those systems were established by elitists and economic shoguns interested in corporate power, not individual rights.\"\n\nRohrabacher supports the legalization of marijuana for both medical and recreational purposes. He has spoken against the policy of cannabis prohibition as early as May 2013, calling it a \"colossal failure\" in an op-ed penned for the \"Orange County Register\". He further outlined his views in a May 2014 op-ed in \"National Review\", arguing that the prohibition of cannabis has incurred a number of undesirable costs upon free society, such as an increase in gang violence, soaring incarceration rates, unconstitutional seizure of private property through civil forfeiture, corruption and militarization of police forces, and negative impacts on minority communities and relationships with Latin-American countries. Rohrabacher has called on fellow Republicans to reconsider their stance towards cannabis, citing core conservative principles such as limited government, individual liberty, respect for the Tenth Amendment, and respect for the doctor–patient relationship that Rohrabacher says lend support to loosening current laws. He also notes conservative leaders such as Milton Friedman, William F. Buckley, and Grover Norquist that have espoused similar drug policy views. In April 2016, Rohrabacher announced his endorsement of California's Proposition 64, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act.\n\nRohrabacher is a strong proponent of states' rights when it comes to cannabis policy. He has introduced the Rohrabacher–Farr amendment for a number of years beginning in 2003, to prohibit the Justice Department from spending funds to interfere with the implementation of state medical cannabis laws. The amendment passed the House for the first time in May 2014, becoming law in December 2014 as part of an omnibus spending bill. Additional legislation that Rohrabacher has introduced includes the Respect State Marijuana Laws Act and the Veterans Equal Access Act. Rohrabacher has called on the DEA / DOJ to remove cannabis from the list of Schedule I drugs. In February 2017, Rohrabacher co-founded the Congressional Cannabis Caucus – along with Reps. Don Young (R–AK), Jared Polis (D–CO), and Earl Blumenauer (D–OR) – to help advance policy change regarding cannabis at the federal level.\n\nRohrabacher was an advocate for the state of California's Proposition 187, which prohibited illegal immigrants from acquiring government services. In 2004, he sponsored an amendment that would have prohibited federal reimbursement of hospital-provided emergency care and certain transportation services to undocumented aliens unless the hospital provided information about the aliens' citizenship, immigration status, financial data, and employer to the Secretary of Homeland Security. Aliens who were in the country illegally would receive reimbursement only after they were deported. The proposed bill was defeated, 331–88.\n\nIn early 2008, Rohrabacher endorsed Mitt Romney in the Republican presidential primary, citing his positions on stemming illegal immigration and criticizing John McCain. About McCain, he said, \"He's been the enemy of those of us who have stemmed the flow of illegals into our country, whereas Romney has made some very tough commitments.\"\n\nIn 2011 Rohrabacher proposed the bill H.R. 787 known as the \"No Social Security for Illegal Immigrants Act of 2011.\" The bill \"Amends title II of the Social Security Act to exclude from creditable wages and self-employment income any wages earned for services by aliens performed in the United States, and self-employment income derived from a trade or business conducted in the United States, while the alien was not authorized to be so employed or to perform a function or service in such a trade or business.\"\n\nIn 2013, an 18-year-old student visited Rohrabacher's office to discuss immigration reform. At some point their conversation became disagreeable, and the student said the congressman yelled at her \"I hate illegals,\" and threatened to deport her family, statements which Rohrabacher's spokesperson has disputed. The spokesperson said that it was the student who started the confrontation by yelling at her and telling her to \"butt out.\"\n\nNumbersUSA has given Rep. Rohrabacher an A+ rating in accordance to his stance on illegal immigration.\n\nRohrabacher was chairman of the Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1997 to January 2005 and has been active on space-related issues. In 2000, Space.com described Rohrabacher as \"a strident advocate for supremacy in space, a philosophy shaped along a winding road from libertarian activist to White House speech writer in the Reagan administration.\" In 2007, Rohrabacher introduced a bill that would direct NASA to develop a strategy \"for deflecting and mitigating potentially hazardous near-Earth objects.\" Rohrabacher has applauded the Apollo astronauts, calling them unofficial ambassadors. Rohrabacher stated \"I applaud their efforts and accomplishments over the past fifty years. And I encourage all Americans to join with me in thanking them for their accomplishments and for the international role they have played in serving as unofficial Ambassadors to the world on our behalf.\"\n\nOn July 18, 2017, Rohrabacher asked a panel of space experts testifying before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology if civilizations could have existed on Mars in the past. Kenneth Farley, a project scientist on NASA’s Mars Rover 2020 Project, said \"I would say that is extremely unlikely\".\n\nRohrabacher doubts that global warming is caused by humans. During a congressional hearing on climate change on February 8, 2007, Rohrabacher mused that previous warming cycles may have been caused by carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by \"dinosaur flatulence.\" He stated, \"In fact, it is assumed at best to be unproven and at worst a liberal claptrap, trendy, but soon to go out of style in our new Congress.\" Politico and the New York Times reported that on May 25, 2011, Rohrabacher expressed further skepticism regarding the existence of man-made global warming and suggested that, if global warming is an issue, a possible solution could be clear-cutting rain forests, and replanting. These reports sparked strong criticism by some scientists, including Oliver Phillips, a geography professor at the University of Leeds. They noted the consensus that intact forests act as net absorbers of carbon, reducing global warming. In response, Rohrabacher stated,\n\nRohrabacher denies that global warming is a problem. At a town hall meeting with the Newport Mesa Tea Party in August 2013, Rohrabacher said \"global warming is a total fraud\" and part of a \"game plan\" by liberals to “create global government.”\n\nIn February 2013, Rohrabacher gave a speech urging the right to self-determination for the Baloch people in Pakistan at a UNPO conference in London.\n\nIn March 2005, Rohrabacher introduced HR 1061, the American Property Claims Against Ethiopia Act, which would \"prohibit United States assistance to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia until the Ethiopian government returns all property of United States citizens.\" The bill was introduced by Rohrabacher at the behest of Gebremedhin Berhane, a former Eritrean national and friend of the Rohrabacher family, after his business was expropriated by the Ethiopian government.\n\nOn March 7, 2006, Rohrabacher introduced HR 4895, an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, \"to limit the provision of the United States military assistance and the sale, transfer, or licensing of United States military equipment or technology to Ethiopia.\"\n\nDuring an appearance on MSNBC's \"The Ed Show\", Rohrabacher accused Barack Obama of allowing violence in Iran to get out of hand because he did not speak forcefully enough against the country's leadership. He also said that Gorbachev tore down the Berlin Wall because Reagan told him to (\"Tear down this wall\").\n\nIn early 2010, he went to Honduras to commend the election of the new president. His entourage included a group of Californian property investors and businessmen, a dealer in rare coins, and CEOs from San Diego biofuels corporation (which is headed by a family friend).\n\nIn 2006, Rohrabacher chaired the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the U.S. House Committee on International Relations, which investigated whether the Oklahoma City bombers had assistance from foreign sources and determined there was no conclusive evidence of a foreign connection. In the 113th Congress, Rohrabacher is chair of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia and Emerging Threats.\n\nRohrabacher has stated that he sees Islam as the source of a major terrorist threat to the U.S. Speaking about Islam he said during a hearing in April 2013, \"I hope we all work together against a religion that will motivate people to murder children and other threats to us as a civilization.\"\n\nIn 2014, Rohrabacher suggested that Iraq's borders be redrawn in response to the establishment of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.\n\nOn June 10 2017, a day after ISIL attack in Tehran, during a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing on Lebanon's Hezbollah, Rohrabacher stated that: \n\nRohrabacher's statement was criticised in social media, by British political journalist Mehdi Hasan, Human Rights Watch Deputy Director Jim Murphy, journalist Negar Mortazavi and the National Iranian American Council, among others.\n\nIn a further statement to clarify his position, he stated that he \"oppose the use of force against unarmed civilians no matter who is the victim or who is doing the killing\" but he is also against \"Iran’s vicious Mullah monarchy\" and \"when it comes to Sunni terrorists or Shiite terrorists, I prefer them to target each other rather than any other victims, especially innocent civilians and Americans.\" Also added that it will \"require support for those proud Iranians who want to win their freedom and heritage from Mullahs and are willing to fight for it. That does not include Isis, but it may include a lot of Iranians who see blowing up Khomeini’s mausoleum as an expression of freedom from the yolk of Islamic terror.\"\n\nOn April 17, 2007, while defending the Bush administration's program of extraordinary rendition. During a House hearing on trans-atlantic relations, Rohrabacher stated that the unfair treatment of one innocent suspect is an acceptable \"unfortunate consequence\" of holding others who would otherwise be free to commit terror acts. After he received boos and groans from the gallery, Rohrabacher responded, \"Well, I hope it's your families, I hope it's your families that suffer the consequences\", and \"I hope it's your family members that die\". Rohrabacher was subsequently interrupted by protesters wearing orange jumpsuits who were removed from the gallery. For his comment that imprisoning and torturing one innocent person was a fair price to pay for locking up 50 terrorists who would \"go out and plant a bomb and kill 20,000 people,\" Rohrabacher was named \"Countdown with Keith Olbermann's\" \"Worst Person in the World\" on April 25.\n\nRohrabacher's interest in Afghanistan extends back at least to the late 1980s, before his time in office, when he entered the country in the company of mujahedin fighters who were intent on confronting Soviet occupation forces. Reportedly, these fighters \"actually engaged Soviet troops in combat near the city of Jalalabad during the two months Rohrabacher was with them.\" In 2003, he defended the new Afghan constitution against those who saw in it mainly empowerment of warlords, saying:\nRohrabacher has since become a proponent of withdrawing from Afghanistan. He protested against the troop build up to Afghanistan by President Obama saying \"If the Taliban is going is be defeated, it's got to be by the Afghan people themselves, not by sending more U.S. troops, which could actually be counterproductive.\" When Congressman Jim McGovern offered an amendment earlier this year requiring the Pentagon to draw up an exit plan from Afghanistan, Rohrabacher was just one of six Republicans to sign on. Rohrabacher further voted for McGovern's Amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act, requiring an exit plan from Afghanistan. The bill failed by 204–215 margin.\n\nRohrabacher is against President Obama's gradual draw down of troops supporting a full withdrawal. Saying \"If we're going to leave, we should leave.\" Rohrabacher has gone on to state \"The centralized system of government foisted upon the Afghan people is not going to hold after we leave,\" continued Rohrabacher. \"So let's quit prolonging the agony and inevitable. Karzai's regime is corrupt and non representative of Afghanistan's tribal culture. This failed strategy is not worth one more drop of American blood. Under the current strategy, our military presence alienates more Afghans that it pacifies. So if you're going to pull the plug, then we need to get the hell out now.\" Rohrabacher has repeatedly raised high-level concerns in the US Congress and Washington, D.C., about the significant corruption in Afghanistan, including the Kabul Bank scandal where hundreds of millions of U.S. taxpayers' dollars allegedly disappeared in a short period of time at the apparent hands of close Karzai family members, including brothers Mahmoud Karzai (a.k.a. Mahmood Karzai), Ahmed Wali Karzai and others. Rohrabacher worked to bring attention to the systemic corruption in the Karzai government and cut U.S. taxpayers' funding for these wasteful projects and programs, involving corruption within the Hamid Karzai government.\n\nIn April 2012, CNN reported that \"A top Republican on the House Foreign Affairs committee was asked by the State Department not to go to Afghanistan because President Hamid Karzai objected to the visit. ... Dana Rohrabacher, R-California, told Security Clearance he was readying to travel with five other Republicans from Dubai to Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, when the State Department requested he stay behind.\"\n\nRohrabacher was opposed to American ground troops in the Yugoslav Wars. He advocated for the direct bombing of the military on Yugoslav soil, criticizing the ineffectiveness of western forces against the Bosnian Serbs, NATO was limited to small fixed attacks, as these Serbs penetrated UN safe areas and attacked Bosniak forces. Rohrabacher said they \"should bomb Serbia's military infrastructure, in Serbia – get that, in Serbia – rather than dropping a couple of duds on tents, which only proves the West's gutlessness, and emboldens Serbian cutthroats.\" Rohrabacher considered the events in Bosnia to constitute genocide. In 1995, Rohrabacher personally visited Sarajevo in Bosnia, criticizing the devastation Serb forces inflicted on the city, saying \"This is a loss to all mankind, not just to the people of Sarajevo,\". He also encountered vagabond children asking for money.\n\nThe leader of the Albanian American Civic League ethnic lobby group, Joseph J. DioGuardi, praised Rohrabacher for his support to the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), saying \"He was the first member of Congress to insist that the United States arm the Kosova Liberation Army, and one of the few members who to this day publicly supports the independence of Kosova.\" Rohrabacher gave a speech in support of American equipping the KLA with weaponry, comparing it to French support of America in the Revolutionary War, saying \"Based on our own experience, the Kosova Liberation Army should have been armed. ... If the U.S. had armed the KLA in 1998, we would not be where we are today. The 'freedom fighters' would have secured their freedom and Kosova would be independent.\"\n\nIn 2012 Rohrabacher stated,\nand \n\nRohrabacher voted in support of the Authorization for the Use of Military Force Against Iraq in 2002, a position that he later admitted was \"a mistake.\"\n\nIn August 2012, Rohrabacher noted on his official website that he had written a letter addressed to the U.S. State Department, noting his support of U.S. sponsorship of separatist movements in Iran. This elicited criticism from the Iranian-American community, which included challenging Rohrabacher's understanding of the historical background alluded to in his letter to the Department of State.\n\nOn June 10 2017, a day after ISIL attack in Tehran, during a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing on Lebanon's Hezbollah, he stated the notion to support ISIL. (See Terrorism)\n\nIn May 2011, in the wake of Osama Bin Laden's death, Rohrabacher introduced a bill to stop aid to Pakistan, stating that members of the government and of Pakistan's security force, the ISI, were either sheltering Bin Laden or completely incompetent. \"We can no longer afford this foolishness. ... The time has come for us to stop subsidizing those who actively oppose us. Pakistan has shown itself not to be America's ally.\" Rohrabacher also demanded the return of the US helicopter that crashed in the operation to kill Bin Laden, stating \"If this is not done immediately, it is probable, given Pakistan’s history, that our technology has already found its way into the hands of the Communist Chinese military that is buying, building, and stealing the necessary military technology to challenge the United States.\" \n\nIn 2007, Rohrabacher supported Mohiuddin Ahmed, a detainee in the U.S., who was said to be involved in an attempted coup in Bangladesh, during which several people were murdered. Bangladesh's extradition request was halted as Rohrabacher voiced concern about his legal rights, saying that he should be sent somewhere with no death penalty. His support was applauded by both Amnesty International and the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops.\n\nOn September 8, 2008, at a House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee meeting, Rohrabacher argued that the Georgians had initiated the recent military confrontation in the ongoing Russia–Georgia war.\n\nIn April 2014, he supported the idea of Alaskans rejoining Russia if a majority voters in Alaska wanted to.\n\nAccording to a 2015 article by \"Politico\" reporter Luke O'Brien, Rohrabacher is known for his long-time friendship with Russia's Vladimir Putin and his defense of \"the Russian point of view.\" On June 15, 2016, Kevin McCarthy told a group of Republicans, \"There's two people I think Putin pays: Rohrabacher and Trump. Swear to God.\" Paul Ryan ended the conversation, saying \"No leaks. This is how we know we're a real family here.\"\n\nIt was not reported for another year that around that time, Rohrabacher had planned, in his capacity as chair of the Europe subcommittee, to hold a hearing on the Magnitsky Act, which bars certain Russian officials from entering the United States or holding any financial assets in American banks. At the hearing Bill Browder, the American-born investor who had lobbied for the act's passage after what he claims was the illegal appropriation of his hedge fund's assets and the subsequent murder of his Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitsky after he discovered this, was to testify. Rohrabacher planned to subject him to what was described as a \"show trial\", where in addition to questioning Browder closely and skeptically about his claims, a feature-length documentary film critical of the Magnitsky claims directed by Eduard Nekrasov was to be shown in its entirety. Among the other witnesses scheduled to testify were Russian lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya, a longtime lobbyist against the Magnitsky Act who had around the same time attended a meeting with Donald Trump Jr, Jared Kushner and Trump's then-campaign manager Paul Manafort at which the Russians purportedly offered to share negative information about Hillary Clinton, Trump's opponent in that year's election.\n\nWhen Foreign Affairs Committee chairman Ed Royce learned of the plans, he canceled the hearing and forbade Rohrabacher from showing the film. In its stead, he held a full committee hearing on U.S.-Russia relations at which Rohrabacher was allowed to submit some of the pro-Russian claims into evidence. The film was ultimately shown at the Newseum, and an intern in Rohrabacher's office who later worked for the Trump transition team sent emails promoting the film from the subcommittee offices.\n\nAfter Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential election, Rohrabacher defends his approach to improve the U.S.-Russia relations. He had previously met at least twice to discuss Russian sanctions with Rinat Akhmetshin, a former Soviet spy, who was later revealed to be present at the June 2016 meeting.\n\nIn a May 2017 interview with CNN, Rohrabacher said, \"We have a huge double standard with Russia when it comes to prisoners and other things,\" and further stated that interference by the Russian intelligence services' in the 2016 U.S. election was the same as the NSA bugging German Chancellor Angela Merkel's phone.\n\nAfter President-elect Donald Trump answered a congratulatory phone call from democratically elected President of Taiwan Tsai Ing-wen on December 2, 2016, Congressman Rohrabacher said Trump's phone call with Taiwan's president was \"terrific\" because of the diplomatic warning it sent to China. \"He showed the dictators in Beijing that he's not a pushover.\" He emphasized, \"China has had an enormously aggressive foreign policy and by him actually going to Taiwan, he's showing the people in Beijing that they cannot have this aggressive foreign policy and expect to be treated just the same by an American president.\"\n\nRohrabacher gave a \"qualified defense\" of the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014. On March 6, 2014, he was one of 23 members of the House of Representatives to vote against a $1 billion loan guarantee to support the new government of Ukraine. In the March 11, 2014, House of Representatives vote (402 voting yes; 7 opposed) to condemn Russia for violating Ukraine's sovereignty, Rohrabacher voted \"present.\" Commenting on the issue, he stated, \"Starting with our own American Revolution, groups of people have declared themselves, rightfully, to be under a different government or a government of their choosing. People forget that’s what our Declaration of Independence is all about.\" He also said, \"The sanctions are an abomination of hypocrisy. This is ridiculous: What we were doing with the violence and military action we took to secure the Kosovars' right to self-determination was far more destructive and had far more loss of life than what Putin's done trying to ensure the people of Crimea are not cut off from what they would choose as their destiny with Russia.\"\n\nDuring a US Congressional delegation's visit to Uzbekistan in February 2013, Rohrabacher made several controversial statements. The chief among those statements was that the United States should treat Uzbekistan like Saudi Arabia by disregarding the former's human rights abuses in achieving America's national interests, particularly in selling armaments and drones to Uzbekistan.\n\nIn 2017, in an interview for an Albanian TV channel Vizion Plus Rohrabacher suggested that the Republic of Macedonia \"is not a country\" and that the \"Kosovars and Albanians from Macedonia should be part of Kosovo and the rest of Macedonia should be part of Bulgaria or any other country to which they believe they are related\", which provoked a response from the Macedonian foreign ministry which accused him of inflaming \"nationalistic rhetoric\".\n\nIn the wake of the clashes at the Turkish Ambassador's Residence in May 2017, Rohrabacher called Donald Trump to never invite Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan again to the United States, and to bar Americans from purchasing Turkish government debt.\n\nIn August 2017, Rohrabacher proposed amending the Department of Defense budget whereby the United States would establish military ties with Eritrea. Rohrabacher suggested that the two countries should cooperate in fighting the War on Terror, curbing Iranian influence in the Yemeni Civil War, and securing the Red Sea region. At the time of Rohrabacher's proposal, Eritrea was subject to international sanctions due to its alleged support of Al-Shabaab in Somalia, and to U.S. sanctions against the Eritrean Navy following an alleged shipment of North Korean military hardware to Eritrea.\n\nOn May 17, 2017, the \"Washington Post\" reported that a month before Donald Trump clinched the GOP nomination, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy stated “There’s two people I think Putin pays: Rohrabacher and Trump. Swear to God.” Brendan Buck, Counselor to Speaker Ryan, initially denied these reports but later, after being informed that the Post would cite a recording as evidence, claimed that Congressman McCarthy was joking.\n\nDana Rohrabacher has been married to Rhonda Rohrabacher since 1997. In 2004, they became parents of triplets: Annika, Christian and Tristen.\n\nRohrabacher was described by the \"Los Angeles Times\" as \"an avid surfer.\"\nHe also sings, plays guitar and has written his own song about freedom and America\n\nRohrabacher revealed in May 2016 that he uses a cannabis-infused topical rub to treat the arthritis pain that he suffers from, allowing him to sleep through the night. The product is legal under California state law but remains a banned substance under U.S. federal law.\n\n\n"}
