{"id": "4650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4650", "title": "Black hole", "text": "Black hole\n\nA black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing—not even particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from inside it. The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole. The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although the event horizon has an enormous effect on the fate and circumstances of an object crossing it, no locally detectable features appear to be observed. In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light. Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.\n\nObjects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.\n\nBlack holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses () may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.\n\nDespite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.\n\nOn 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger. On 15 June 2016, a second detection of a gravitational wave event from colliding black holes was announced.\n\nThe idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by astronomical pioneer John Michell in a letter published in 1783–84. Michell's simplistic calculations assumed that such a body might have the same density as the Sun, and concluded that such a body would form when a star's diameter exceeds the Sun's by a factor of 500, and the surface escape velocity exceeds the usual speed of light. Michell correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies. Scholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible stars might be hiding in plain view, but enthusiasm dampened when the wavelike nature of light became apparent around the early nineteenth century. If light were a wave rather than a \"corpuscle\", it became unclear what, if any, influence gravity would have on escaping light waves. In any case, thanks to modern relativity, we now know that Michell's picture of a light ray shooting directly out from the surface of a supermassive star, being slowed down by the star's gravity, stopping, and then free-falling back to the star's surface, is fundamentally incorrect.\n\nIn 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass. A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties. This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity. Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because \"a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere).\"\n\nIn 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at ) has no stable solutions. His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse. They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.\n\nOppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called \"frozen stars\", because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.\n\nIn 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, \"a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction\". This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.\n\nThese results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967, which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.\n\nIn this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged. Through the work of Werner Israel, Brandon Carter, and David Robinson the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.\n\nAt first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.\n\nWork by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.\n\nThe first use of the term \"black hole\" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article \"\"'Black Holes' in Space\"\",\ndated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1967, a student reportedly suggested the phrase \"black hole\" at a lecture by John Wheeler; Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and \"advertising value\", and it quickly caught on, leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.\n\nThe no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum. Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.\n\nThese properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole. Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.\n\nWhen an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm. This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.\n\nThe simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916. According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric. This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole \"sucking in everything\" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.\n\nSolutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.\n\nWhile the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge \"Q\" and the total angular momentum \"J\" are expected to satisfy\n\nfor a black hole of mass \"M\". Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed \"unphysical\". The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. This is supported by numerical simulations.\n\nDue to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.\nBlack holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum \"J\" or electric charge \"Q\". The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass \"M\" through\nwhere \"r\" is the Schwarzschild radius and \"M\" is the mass of the Sun. This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.\n\nThe defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.\n\nAs predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass. At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.\n\nTo a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole. Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it. At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift. Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.\n\nOn the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.\n\nThe shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical. For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.\n\nAt the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite. For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation. In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution. The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.\n\nObservers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (\"i.e.\", non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way. When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the \"noodle effect\".\n\nIn the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole. The possibility of traveling to another universe is, however, only theoretical since any perturbation would destroy this possibility. It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox. It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.\n\nThe appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory. This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.\n\nThe photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.\n\nWhile light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.\n\nOther compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres. This follows from the fact that the gravitational field \"external\" to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.\n\nRotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly \"drag\" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.\n\nThe ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's oblate spheroid event horizon and a pumpkin-shaped outer boundary, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the \"ergosurface\".\n\nObjects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.\n\nIn Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole. The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:\n\nand decreases with increasing spin.\n\nConsidering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius. This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects, and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.\n\nPenrose proved that once an event horizon forms, general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within. Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see \"Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems\"). The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research. The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.\n\nGravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little \"fuel\" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.\nThe collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions and pulsations lead to planetary nebula. This mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding are produced by stars that were over before the collapse.\n\nIf the mass of the remnant exceeds about (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.\n\nThe gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to . These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies. It has further been suggested that supermassive black holes with typical masses of ~ could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe. Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.\n\nWhile most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.\n\nGravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses. Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.\n\nGravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments. This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (\"m\" = ≈ ≈ ), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity. This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as . This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists. Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.\n\nOnce a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown. A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.\n\nAnother possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects. The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.\n\nIn 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation; this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches. If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles. The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.\n\nA stellar black hole of has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink. To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.\n\nIf a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/\"c\" would take less than 10 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.\n\nThe Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes. NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.\n\nBy their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings.\n\nThe Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), however, run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way, and to produce a silhouetted image of it. The first such image may appear as early as 2018. In 2015, the EHT managed to detect magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, and even discern some of their properties. The existence of magnetic fields had been predicted by theoretical studies of black holes.\n\nOn 14 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves. The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses. This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects prior to the merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.\n\nMore importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole. From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger. The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.\n\nThe observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.\n\nThe proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole. Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars. Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million and a radius of less than 0.002 light years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars. The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume. Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.\n\nDue to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but detailed mathematical modelling shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible, while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk.\nWithin such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.\n\nAs such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes. Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion. It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.\n\nIn November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.\n\nX-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.\n\nIf such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.\n\nThe first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster and Paul Murdin in 1972. Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole. Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients. In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.\n\nThe faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon, since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface, an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.\n\nThe X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.\n\nAstronomers use the term \"active galaxy\" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.\nAlthough supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.\n\nIt is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole. The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.\nAnother way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole. One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.\n\nThe evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound. A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars. Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars. These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.\n\nSince the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a black hole is comparable to that of water). Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.\n\nThe evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts. In 2002, much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.\n\nIn 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge. This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.\n\nThe link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.\n\nOne puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.\n\nAlthough general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy. Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.\n\nBecause a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.\n\nThe question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy. Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.\n\nAccording to quantum field theory in curved spacetime, a single emission of Hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles. The outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of Hawking radiation; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole. Assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future. Then, it will only emit a finite amount of information encoded within its Hawking radiation. Assume that at time formula_4, more than half of the information had already been emitted. According to widely accepted research by physicists like Don Page and Leonard Susskind, an outgoing particle emitted at time formula_4 must be entangled with all the Hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted. This creates a paradox: a principle called \"monogamy of entanglement\" requires that, like any quantum system, the outgoing particle cannot be fully entangled with two independent systems at the same time; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled with both the infalling particle and, independently, with past Hawking radiation.\n\nIn order to resolve the paradox, physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested theories: Einstein's equivalence principle, unitarity, or existing quantum field theory. One possible solution, which violates the equivalence principle, is that a \"firewall\" destroys incoming particles at the event horizon.<ref name=\"sciam/Confound\"> Originally published in Quanta, December 21, 2012.</ref> A 2016 analysis of LIGO data shows tentative signs of echoes caused by a fuzzy event horizon; such echoes may be possible in firewall or fuzzball theories but should not occur in classical general relativity. Over the next two years, additional LIGO data should establish whether the echoes were just random noise, or whether they are instead evidence of a violation of classical general relativity.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4651", "title": "Beta decay", "text": "Beta decay\n\nIn nuclear physics, beta decay (\"β\"-decay) is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta ray (fast energetic electron or positron), and a neutrino are emitted from an atomic nucleus. For example, beta decay of a neutron transforms it into a proton by the emission of an electron, or conversely a proton is converted into a neutron by the emission of a positron (positron emission), thus changing the nuclide type. Neither the beta particle nor its associated neutrino exist within the nucleus prior to beta decay, but are created in the decay process. By this process, unstable atoms obtain a more stable ratio of protons to neutrons. The probability of a nuclide decaying due to beta and other forms of decay is determined by its nuclear binding energy. The binding energies of all existing nuclides form what is called the nuclear valley of stability. For either electron or positron emission to be energetically possible, the energy release (see below) or Q value must be positive.\n\nBeta decay is a consequence of the weak force, which is characterized by relatively lengthy decay times. Nucleons are composed of up or down quarks, and the weak force allows a quark to change type by the exchange of a W boson and the creation of an electron/antineutrino or positron/neutrino pair. For example, a neutron, composed of two down quarks and an up quark, decays to a proton composed of a down quark and two up quarks. Decay times for many nuclides that are subject to beta decay can be thousands of years.\n\nElectron capture is sometimes included as a type of beta decay, because the basic nuclear process, mediated by the weak force, is the same. In electron capture, an inner atomic electron is captured by a proton in the nucleus, transforming it into a neutron, and an electron neutrino is released. \n\nThe two types of beta decay are known as \"beta minus\" and \"beta plus\". In beta minus (β) decay, a neutron is converted to a proton and the process creates an electron and an electron antineutrino; while in beta plus (β) decay, a proton is converted to a neutron and the process creates a positron and an electron neutrino. β decay is also known as positron emission.\n\nBeta decay conserves a quantum number known as the lepton number, or the number of electrons and their associated neutrinos (other leptons are the muon and tau particles). These particles have lepton number +1, while their antiparticles have lepton number −1. Since a proton or neutron has lepton number zero, β decay (a positron, or antielectron) must be accompanied with an electron neutrino, while β decay (an electron) must be accompanied by an electron antineutrino.\n\nAn example of electron emission (β decay) is the decay of carbon-14 into nitrogen-14 with a half-life of about 5,730 years:\nIn this form of decay, the original element becomes a new chemical element in a process known as nuclear transmutation. This new element has an unchanged mass number , but an atomic number that is increased by one. As in all nuclear decays, the decaying element (in this case ) is known as the \"parent nuclide\" while the resulting element (in this case ) is known as the \"daughter nuclide\".\n\nAn example of positron emission is the decay of magnesium-23 into sodium-23 with a half-life of about 11.3 s:\nβ decay also results in nuclear transmutation, with the resulting element having an atomic number that is decreased by one.\nThe beta spectrum, or distribution of energy values for the beta particles, is continuous. The total energy of the decay process is divided between the electron, the antineutrino, and the recoiling nuclide. In the figure to the right, an example of an electron with 0.40 MeV energy from the beta decay of Bi is shown. In this example, the total decay energy is 1.16 MeV, so the antineutrino has the remaining energy: 1.16-0.40 = 0.76 MeV. An electron at the far right of the curve would have the maximum possible kinetic energy, leaving the energy of the neutrino to be only its small rest mass.\n\nRadioactivity was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel in uranium, and subsequently observed by Marie and Pierre Curie in thorium and in the new elements polonium and radium. In 1899, Ernest Rutherford separated radioactive emissions into two types: alpha and beta (now beta minus), based on penetration of objects and ability to cause ionization. Alpha rays could be stopped by thin sheets of paper or aluminium, whereas beta rays could penetrate several millimetres of aluminium. In 1900, Paul Villard identified a still more penetrating type of radiation, which Rutherford identified as a fundamentally new type in 1903 and termed gamma rays. Alpha, beta, and gamma are the first three letters of the Greek alphabet.\n\nIn 1900, Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio () for beta particles by the method of J.J. Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that for a beta particle is the same as for Thomson's electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.\n\nIn 1901, Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed that alpha and beta radioactivity involves the transmutation of atoms into atoms of other chemical elements. In 1913, after the products of more radioactive decays were known, Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently proposed their radioactive displacement law, which states that beta (i.e., ) emission from one element produces another element one place to the right in the periodic table, while alpha emission produces an element two places to the left.\n\nThe study of beta decay provided the first physical evidence for the existence of the neutrino. In both alpha and gamma decay, the resulting particle has a narrow energy distribution, since the particle carries the energy from the difference between the initial and final nuclear states. However, the kinetic energy distribution, or spectrum, of beta particles measured by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn in 1911 and by Jean Danysz in 1913 showed multiple lines on a diffuse background. These measurements offered the first hint that beta particles have a continuous spectrum. In 1914, James Chadwick used a magnetic spectrometer with one of Hans Geiger's new counters to make more accurate measurements which showed that the spectrum was continuous. The distribution of beta particle energies was in apparent contradiction to the law of conservation of energy. If beta decay were simply electron emission as assumed at the time, then the energy of the emitted electron should have a particular, well-defined value. For beta decay, however, the observed broad distribution of energies suggested that energy is lost in the beta decay process. This spectrum was puzzling for many years.\n\nA second problem is related to the conservation of angular momentum. Molecular band spectra showed that the nuclear spin of nitrogen-14 is 1 (i.e. equal to the reduced Planck constant) and more generally that the spin is integral for nuclei of even mass number and half-integral for nuclei of odd mass number. This was later explained by the proton-neutron model of the nucleus. Beta decay leaves the mass number unchanged, so the change of nuclear spin must be an integer. However, the electron spin is 1/2, hence angular momentum would not be conserved if beta decay were simply electron emission.\n\nFrom 1920–1927, Charles Drummond Ellis (along with Chadwick and colleagues) further established that the beta decay spectrum is continuous. In 1933, Ellis and Nevill Mott obtained strong evidence that the beta spectrum has an effective upper bound in energy. Niels Bohr had suggested that the beta spectrum could be explained if conservation of energy was true only in a statistical sense, thus this principle might be violated in any given decay. However, the upper bound in beta energies determined by Ellis and Mott ruled out that notion. Now, the problem of how to account for the variability of energy in known beta decay products, as well as for conservation of momentum and angular momentum in the process, became acute.\n\nIn a famous letter written in 1930, Wolfgang Pauli attempted to resolve the beta-particle energy conundrum by suggesting that, in addition to electrons and protons, atomic nuclei also contained an extremely light neutral particle, which he called the neutron. He suggested that this \"neutron\" was also emitted during beta decay (thus accounting for the known missing energy, momentum, and angular momentum), but it had simply not yet been observed. In 1931, Enrico Fermi renamed Pauli's \"neutron\" to neutrino. In 1934, Fermi published his landmark theory for beta decay, where he applied the principles of relativity to matter particles, supposing that they can be created and annihilated, just as the light quanta in atomic transitions. Thus, according to Fermi, neutrinos are created in the beta-decay process, rather than contained in the nucleus; the same happens to electrons. The neutrino interaction with matter was so weak that detecting it proved a severe experimental challenge. Further indirect evidence of the existence of the neutrino was obtained by observing the recoil of nuclei that emitted such a particle after absorbing an electron. Neutrinos were finally detected directly in 1956 by Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines in the Cowan–Reines neutrino experiment. The properties of neutrinos were (with a few minor modifications) as predicted by Pauli and Fermi.\n\nIn 1934, Frédéric and Irène Joliot-Curie bombarded aluminium with alpha particles to effect the nuclear reaction  +  →  + , and observed that the product isotope emits a positron identical to those found in cosmic rays (discovered by Carl David Anderson in 1932). This was the first example of  decay (positron emission), which they termed artificial radioactivity since is a short-lived nuclide which does not exist in nature.\n\nThe theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed in 1937 by Luis Alvarez, in the nuclide V. Alvarez went on to study electron capture in Ga and other nuclides.\n\nIn 1956, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang noticed that there was no evidence that parity was conserved in weak interactions, and so they postulated that this symmetry may not be preserved by the weak force. They sketched the design for an experiment for testing conservation of parity in the laboratory. Later that year, Chien-Shiung Wu and coworkers conducted the Wu experiment showing an asymmetrical beta decay of cobalt-60 at cold temperatures that proved that parity is not conserved in beta decay. This surprising result overturned long-held assumptions about parity and the weak force. In recognition of their theoretical work, Lee and Yang were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957.\n\nIn  decay, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number increased by one, while emitting an electron () and an electron antineutrino ().  decay generally occurs in neutron-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\nwhere and are the mass number and atomic number of the decaying nucleus, and X and X' are the initial and final elements, respectively.\n\nAnother example is when the free neutron () decays by  decay into a proton ():\n\nAt the fundamental level (as depicted in the Feynman diagram on the right), this is caused by the conversion of the negatively charged (− e) down quark to the positively charged (+ e) up quark by emission of a boson; the boson subsequently decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino:\n\nIn  decay, or \"positron emission\", the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number decreased by one, while emitting a positron () and an electron neutrino ().  decay generally occurs in proton-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\nThis may be considered as the decay of a proton inside the nucleus to a neutron\n\nHowever,  decay cannot occur in an isolated proton because it requires energy due to the mass of the neutron being greater than the mass of the proton.  decay can only happen inside nuclei when the daughter nucleus has a greater binding energy (and therefore a lower total energy) than the mother nucleus. The difference between these energies goes into the reaction of converting a proton into a neutron, a positron and a neutrino and into the kinetic energy of these particles. This process is opposite to negative beta decay, in that the weak interaction converts a proton into a neutron by converting an up quark into a down quark resulting in the emission of a or the absorption of a .\n\nIn all cases where  decay (positron emission) of a nucleus is allowed energetically, so too is electron capture allowed. This is a process during which a nucleus captures one of its atomic electrons, resulting in the emission of a neutrino:\n\nAn example of electron capture is one of the decay modes of krypton-81 into bromine-81:\n\nAll emitted neutrinos are of the same energy. In proton-rich nuclei where the energy difference between the initial and final states is less than ,  decay is not energetically possible, and electron capture is the sole decay mode.\n\nIf the captured electron comes from the innermost shell of the atom, the K-shell, which has the highest probability to interact with the nucleus, the process is called K-capture. If it comes from the L-shell, the process is called L-capture, etc.\n\nElectron capture is a competing (simultaneous) decay process for all nuclei that can undergo β decay. The converse, however, is not true: electron capture is the \"only\" type of decay that is allowed in proton-rich nuclides that do not have sufficient energy to emit a positron and neutrino.\n\nIf the proton and neutron are part of an atomic nucleus, the above described decay processes transmute one chemical element into another. For example:\n\nBeta decay does not change the number () of nucleons in the nucleus, but changes only its charge . Thus the set of all nuclides with the same  can be introduced; these \"isobaric\" nuclides may turn into each other via beta decay. For a given there is one that is most stable. It is said to be beta stable, because it presents a local minima of the mass excess: if such a nucleus has numbers, the neighbour nuclei and have higher mass excess and can beta decay into , but not vice versa. For all odd mass numbers , there is only one known beta-stable isobar. For even , there are up to three different beta-stable isobars experimentally known; for example, , , and are all beta-stable. There are about 355 known beta-decay stable nuclides.\n\nUsually, unstable nuclides are clearly either \"neutron rich\" or \"proton rich\", with the former undergoing beta decay and the latter undergoing electron capture (or more rarely, due to the higher energy requirements, positron decay). However, in a few cases of odd-proton, odd-neutron radionuclides, it may be energetically favorable for the radionuclide to decay to an even-proton, even-neutron isobar either by undergoing beta-positive or beta-negative decay. An often-cited example is the single isotope (29 protons, 35 neutrons), which illustrates three types of beta decay in competition. Copper-64 has a half-life of about 12.7 hours. This isotope has one unpaired proton and one unpaired neutron, so either the proton or the neutron can decay. This particular nuclide (though not all nuclides in this situation) is almost equally likely to decay through proton decay by positron emission (18%) or electron capture (43%) to , as it is through neutron decay by electron emission (39%) to .\n\nMost naturally occurring nuclides on earth are beta stable. Those that are not have half-lives ranging from under a second to periods of time significantly greater than the age of the universe. One common example of a long-lived isotope is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide , which undergoes all three types of beta decay (, and electron capture) with a half-life of .\n\nwhere\n\nBeta decay just changes neutron to proton or, in the case of positive beta decay (electron capture) proton to neutron so the number of individual quarks don't change. It is only the baryon flavor that changes, here labelled as the isospin.\n\nUp and down quarks have total isospin formula_4 and isospin projections\n\nAll other quarks have \"I\" = 0.\n\nIn general\n\nso all leptons have assigned a value of +1, antileptons −1, and non-leptonic particles 0. \n\nFor allowed decays, the net orbital angular momentum is zero, hence only spin quantum numbers are considered.\n\nThe electron and antineutrino are fermions, spin-1/2 objects, therefore they may couple to total formula_9 (parallel) or formula_10 (anti-parallel).\n\nFor forbidden decays, orbital angular momentum must also be taken into consideration.\n\nThe value is defined as the total energy released in a given nuclear decay. In beta decay, is therefore also the sum of the kinetic energies of the emitted beta particle, neutrino, and recoiling nucleus. (Because of the large mass of the nucleus compared to that of the beta particle and neutrino, the kinetic energy of the recoiling nucleus can generally be neglected.) Beta particles can therefore be emitted with any kinetic energy ranging from 0 to . A typical is around 1 MeV, but can range from a few keV to a few tens of MeV.\n\nSince the rest mass of the electron is 511 keV, the most energetic beta particles are ultrarelativistic, with speeds very close to the speed of light.\n\nConsider the generic equation for beta decay\nThe value for this decay is\nwhere formula_12 is the mass of the nucleus of the atom, formula_13 is the mass of the electron, and formula_14 is the mass of the electron antineutrino. In other words, the total energy released is the mass energy of the initial nucleus, minus the mass energy of the final nucleus, electron, and antineutrino. The mass of the nucleus is related to the standard atomic mass by\nThat is, the total atomic mass is the mass of the nucleus, plus the mass of the electrons, minus the sum of all \"electron\" binding energies for the atom. This equation is rearranged to find formula_12, and formula_17 is found similarly. Substituting these nuclear masses into the Q-value equation, while neglecting the nearly-zero antineutrino mass and the difference in electron binding energies, which is very small for high- atoms, we have\nThis energy is carried away as kinetic energy by the electron and neutrino.\n\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the -value is positive, β decay can occur when the mass of atom is greater than the mass of atom .\n\nThe equations for β decay are similar, with the generic equation\ngiving\nHowever, in this equation, the electron masses do not cancel, and we are left with\n\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the -value is positive, β decay can occur when the mass of atom exceeds that of by at least twice the mass of the electron.\n\nThe analogous calculation for electron capture must take into account the binding energy of the electrons. This is because the atom will be left in an excited state after capturing the electron, and the binding energy of the captured innermost electron is significant. Using the generic equation for electron capture\nwe have\nwhich simplifies to\nwhere is the binding energy of the captured electron.\n\nBecause the binding energy of the electron is much less than the mass of the electron, nuclei that can undergo β decay can always also undergo electron capture, but the reverse is not true.\n\nBeta decay can be considered as a perturbation as described in quantum mechanics, and thus Fermi's Golden Rule can be applied. This leads to an expression for the kinetic energy spectrum of emitted betas as follows:\n\nwhere is the kinetic energy, is a shape function that depends on the forbiddenness of the decay (it is constant for allowed decays), is the Fermi Function (see below) with \"Z\" the charge of the final-state nucleus, is the total energy, is the momentum, and is the Q value of the decay. The kinetic energy of the emitted neutrino is given approximately by minus the kinetic energy of the beta.\n\nAs an example, the beta decay spectrum of Bi (originally called RaE) is shown to the right.\n\nThe Fermi function that appears in the beta spectrum formula accounts for the Coulomb attraction / repulsion between the emitted beta and the final state nucleus. Approximating the associated wavefunctions to be spherically symmetric, the Fermi function can be analytically calculated to be:\n\nwhere (α is the fine-structure constant), (+ for electrons, − for positrons), ( is the radius of the final state nucleus), and Γ is the Gamma function.\n\nFor non-relativistic betas (), this expression can be approximated by:\n\nOther approximations can be found in the literature.\n\nA Kurie plot (also known as a Fermi–Kurie plot) is a graph used in studying beta decay developed by Franz N. D. Kurie, in which the square root of the number of beta particles whose momenta (or energy) lie within a certain narrow range, divided by the Fermi function, is plotted against beta-particle energy. It is a straight line for allowed transitions and some forbidden transitions, in accord with the Fermi beta-decay theory. The energy-axis (x-axis) intercept of a Kurie plot corresponds to the maximum energy imparted to the electron/positron (the decay's -value). With a Kurie plot one can find the limit on the effective mass of a neutrino.\n\nAfter the discovery of parity non-conservation (see History), it was found that, in beta decay, electrons are emitted mostly with negative helicity, i.e., they move, naively speaking, like left-handed screws driven into a material (they have negative longitudinal polarization). Conversely, positrons have mostly positive helicity, i.e., they move like right-handed screws. Neutrinos (emitted in positron decay) have positive helicity, while antineutrinos (emitted in electron decay) have negative helicity.\n\nThe higher the energy of the particles, the higher their polarization.\n\nBeta decays can be classified according to the angular momentum (-value) and total spin (-value) of the emitted radiation. Since total angular momentum must be conserved, including orbital and spin angular momentum, beta decay occurs by a variety of quantum state transitions to various nuclear angular momentum or spin states, known as \"Fermi\" or \"Gamow-Teller\" transitions. When beta decay particles carry no angular momentum (L = 0), the decay is referred to as \"allowed\", otherwise it is \"forbidden\".\n\nOther decay modes, which are rare, are known as bound state decay and double beta decay.\n\nA Fermi transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_10, leading to an angular momentum change formula_27 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition). In the non-relativistic limit, the nuclear part of the operator for a Fermi transition is given by\n\nwith formula_29 the weak vector coupling constant, formula_30 the isospin raising and lowering operators, and formula_31 running over all protons and neutrons in the nucleus.\n\nA Gamow-Teller transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin formula_9, leading to an angular momentum change formula_33 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition).\nIn this case, the nuclear part of the operator is given by\n\nwith formula_35 the weak axial-vector coupling constant, and formula_36 the spin Pauli matrices, which can produce a spin-flip in the decaying nucleon.\n\nWhen , the decay is referred to as \"forbidden\". Nuclear selection rules require high L-values to be accompanied by changes in nuclear spin () and parity (π). The selection rules for the th forbidden transitions are:\n\nwhere or corresponds to no parity change or parity change, respectively. The special case of a transition between isobaric analogue states, where the structure of the final state is very similar to the structure of the initial state, is referred to as \"superallowed\" for beta decay, and proceeds very quickly. The following table lists the Δ and Δπ values for the first few values of :\n\nA very small minority of free neutron decays (about four per million) are so-called \"two-body decays\", in which the proton, electron and antineutrino are produced, but the electron fails to gain the 13.6 eV energy necessary to escape the proton, and therefore simply remains bound to it, as a neutral hydrogen atom. In this type of beta decay, in essence all of the neutron decay energy is carried off by the antineutrino.\n\nFor fully ionized atoms (bare nuclei), it is possible in likewise manner for electrons to fail to escape the atom, and to be emitted from the nucleus into low-lying atomic bound states (orbitals). This cannot occur for neutral atoms with low-lying bound states which are already filled by electrons.\n\nThe phenomenon in fully ionized atoms was first observed for Dy in 1992 by Jung et al. of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research group. Although neutral Dy is a stable isotope, the fully ionized Dy undergoes β decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47 days.\n\nAnother possibility is that a fully ionized atom undergoes greatly accelerated β decay, as observed for Re by Bosch et al., also at Darmstadt. Neutral Re does undergo β decay with a half-life of 42 × 10 years, but for fully ionized Re this is shortened by a factor of 10 to only 32.9 years. For comparison the variation of decay rates of other nuclear processes due to chemical environment is less than 1%.\n\nSome nuclei can undergo double beta decay (ββ decay) where the charge of the nucleus changes by two units. Double beta decay is difficult to study, as the process has an extremely long half-life. In nuclei for which both β decay and ββ decay are possible, the rarer ββ decay process is effectively impossible to observe. However, in nuclei where β decay is forbidden but ββ decay is allowed, the process can be seen and a half-life measured. Thus, ββ decay is usually studied only for beta stable nuclei. Like single beta decay, double beta decay does not change ; thus, at least one of the nuclides with some given has to be stable with regard to both single and double beta decay.\n\n\"Ordinary\" double beta decay results in the emission of two electrons and two antineutrinos. If neutrinos are Majorana particles (i.e., they are their own antiparticles), then a decay known as neutrinoless double beta decay will occur. Most neutrino physicists believe that neutrinoless double beta decay has never been observed.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4652", "title": "Blitzkrieg", "text": "Blitzkrieg\n\nBlitzkrieg (German, \"lightning war\") is a method of warfare whereby an attacking force, spearheaded by a dense concentration of armoured and motorised or mechanised infantry formations with close air support, breaks through the opponent's line of defence by short, fast, powerful attacks and then dislocates the defenders, using speed and surprise to encircle them. Through the employment of combined arms in manoeuvre warfare, blitzkrieg attempts to unbalance the enemy by making it difficult for it to respond to the continuously changing front, then defeat it in a decisive (battle of annihilation).\n\nDuring the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with systematic application of the traditional German tactic of (maneuver warfare), deep penetrations and the bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy enemy forces in a (cauldron battle). During the Invasion of Poland, Western journalists adopted the term \"blitzkrieg\" to describe this form of armoured warfare. The term had appeared in 1935, in a German military periodical (German Defense), in connection to quick or lightning warfare. German manoeuvre operations were successful in the campaigns of 1939–1941 and by 1940 the term \"blitzkrieg\" was extensively used in Western media. Blitzkrieg operations capitalized on surprise penetrations (e.g., the penetration of the Ardennes forest region), general enemy unreadiness and their inability to match the pace of the German attack. During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to re-form defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on.\n\nDespite being common in German and English-language journalism during World War II, the word was never used by the Wehrmacht as an official military term, except for propaganda. Some senior officers, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, even disputed the idea that it was a military concept. Kielmansegg asserted that what many regarded as blitzkrieg was nothing more than \"ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation\". Student described it as ideas that \"naturally emerged from the existing circumstances\" as a response to operational challenges. The Wehrmacht never officially adopted it as a concept or doctrine. In 2005, the historian Karl-Heinz Frieser summarized blitzkrieg as the result of German commanders using the latest technology in the most beneficial way according to traditional military principles and employing \"the right units in the right place at the right time\". Modern historians now understand blitzkrieg as the combination of the traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century, with the military technology of the interwar period. Modern historians use the term casually as a generic description for the style of manoeuvre warfare practised by Germany during the early part of World War II, rather than as an explanation. According to Frieser, in the context of the thinking of Heinz Guderian on mobile combined arms formations, blitzkrieg can be used as a synonym for modern manoeuvre warfare on the operational level.\n\nThe traditional meaning of blitzkrieg is that of German tactical and operational methodology in the first half of the Second World War, that is often hailed as a new method of warfare. The word, meaning \"lightning war\", in its strategic sense describes a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it could fully mobilize. Tactically, blitzkrieg is a coordinated military effort by tanks, motorized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to defeat the opponent and break through its defences. \"Blitzkrieg\" as used by Germany had considerable psychological, or \"terror\" elements, such as the \"Jericho Trompete\", a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive-bomber, to affect the morale of enemy forces. The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940 and instead bombs sometimes had whistles attached. It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological warfare by using Fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operations.\n\nThe origin of the term \"blitzkrieg\" is obscure. It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German army or air force, and no \"coherent doctrine\" or \"unifying concept of blitzkrieg\" existed. The term seems rarely to have been used in the German military press before 1939 and recent research at the German \"Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt\" at Potsdam found it in only two military articles from the 1930s. Both used the term to mean a swift strategic knock-out, rather than a radical new military doctrine or approach to war. The first article (1935) deals primarily with supplies of food and materiel in wartime. The term \"blitzkrieg\" is used with reference to German efforts to win a quick victory in the First World War but is not associated with the use of armoured, mechanised or air forces. It argued that Germany must develop self-sufficiency in food, because it might again prove impossible to deal a swift knock-out to its enemies, leading to a long war. In the second article (1938), launching a swift strategic knock-out is described as an attractive idea for Germany but difficult to achieve on land under modern conditions (especially against systems of fortification like the Maginot Line), unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise could be achieved. The author vaguely suggests that a massive strategic air attack might hold out better prospects but the topic is not explored in detail. A third relatively early use of the term in German occurs in \"Die Deutsche Kriegsstärke\" (German War Strength) by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish, Marxist, political economist and refugee from the Third Reich, published in 1938 in Paris and in London as \"Germany and a Lightning War\". Sternberg wrote that Germany was not prepared economically for a long war but might win a quick war (\"\"Blitzkrieg\"\") . He did not go into detail about tactics or suggest that the German armed forces had evolved a radically new operational method. His book offers scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won.\n\nIn English and other languages, the term had been used since the 1920s. The British press used it to describe the German successes in Poland in September 1939, called by Harris \"a piece of journalistic sensationalism – a buzz-word with which to label the spectacular early successes of the Germans in the Second World War\". It was later applied to the bombing of Britain, particularly London, hence \"The Blitz\" . The German popular press followed suit nine months later, after the fall of France in 1940; hence although the word had been used in German, it was first popularized by British journalism. Heinz Guderian referred to it as a word coined by the Allies: \"as a result of the successes of our rapid campaigns our enemies ... coined the word \"Blitzkrieg\"\". After the German failure in the Soviet Union in 1941, use of the term began to be frowned upon in the Third Reich, and Hitler then denied ever using the term, saying in a speech in November 1941, \"I have never used the word \"Blitzkrieg\", because it is a very silly word\". In early January 1942, Hitler dismissed it as \"Italian phraseology\".\n\nIn 1914, German strategic thinking derived from the writings of Carl von Clausewitz (June 1, 1780 – November 16, 1831), Helmuth von Moltke the Elder (26 October 1800 – 24 April 1891) and Alfred von Schlieffen (28 February 1833 – 4 January 1913), who advocated manoeuvre, mass and envelopment to create the conditions for a decisive battle . During the war, generals such as Oskar von Hutier developed tactics to restore manoeuvre on the battlefield. Specialist light infantry (\"Sturmtruppen\" storm troops) were to exploit soft spots, to make gaps for larger infantry units to advance with heavier weapons and exploit the success, leaving isolated strong points to troops following up. Hutier tactics were combined with short hurricane artillery bombardments using massed artillery, devised by Colonel Georg Bruchmüller. Attacks were to rely on speed and surprise rather than on weight of numbers. Hutier-Bruchmüller tactics met with great success in Operation Michael, the spring offensive of 1918 and restored temporarily the war of movement, once the Allied trench system had been overrun. The German armies pushed on towards Amiens and then Paris, coming within before supply difficulties and Allied reinforcements halted the advance.\n\nOn the Eastern Front, the war did not bog down into trench warfare; German and Russian armies fought a war of manoeuvre over thousands of miles, which gave the German leadership unique experience which the trench-bound western Allies did not experience. Studies of operations in the east led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat power than large, uncoordinated forces. After the war, the \"Reichswehr\" modified Hutier tactics. The commander in chief, Hans von Seeckt, argued that there had been an excessive focus on encirclement and emphasized speed instead. Seeckt inspired a revision of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (maneuver warfare) thinking and its associated \"Auftragstaktik\", in which the commander gave his intent and subordinates the discretion to achieve it, within limits determined by the training of an elite officer-corps, which made their decisions predictable to other commanders. Delegation increased the tempo of operations, which had great influence on the success of German armies in the early war period. Seeckt rejected the idea of numerical superiority and developed the German army into a small, mobile force and encouraged technical advances, of which one of the results was enhancing the radio use, which allowed better coordination between motorized infantry, tanks and planes and thus provided the necessary conditions for the subsequent Blitzkrieg. He thus transformed it into an army of commanders, who could cover at least the next level of command.\nGerman operational theories were revised after the First World War. The Treaty of Versailles limited the Reichswehr to a maximum of 100,000 men, making impossible the deployment of mass armies. The German General Staff was abolished by the treaty but continued covertly as the \"Truppenamt\" (Troop Office), disguised as an administrative body. Committees of veteran staff officers were formed within the \"Truppenamt\" to evaluate 57 issues of the war. By the time of the Second World War, their reports had led to doctrinal and training publications, including H. Dv. 487, \"Führung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen\" (Command and Battle of the Combined Arms), known as das Fug (1921–23) and \"Truppenführung\" (1933–34), containing standard procedures for combined-arms warfare. The \"Reichswehr\" was influenced by its analysis of pre-war German military thought, in particular infiltration tactics, which at the end of the war had seen some breakthroughs on the Western Front and the manoeuvre warfare which dominated the Eastern Front.\n\nThe British army took lessons from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918. To obtain the best co-operation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, rigid control and adherence to orders. Mechanization of the army was considered a means to avoid mass casualties and indecisive nature of offensives, as part of a combined-arms theory of war. The four editions of \"Field Service Regulations\" published after 1918 held that only combined-arms operations could create enough fire power to enable mobility on a battlefield. This theory of war also emphasized consolidation, recommending caution against overconfidence and ruthless exploitation.\n\nIn the Sinai and Palestine Campaign, operations involved some aspects of what would later be called \"blitzkrieg\". Key elements in the \"blitzkrieg warfare\" at the decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed; success depended on attacking only in terrain favoring the movement of large formations around the battlefield and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack. General Edmund Allenby used infantry to attack the strong Ottoman front line in co-operation with supporting artillery, augmented by the guns of two destroyers. Through constant pressure by infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus (Battle of Megiddo).\n\nThe British methods induced \"strategic paralysis\" among the Ottomans and led to their rapid and complete collapse. In an advance of , captures were estimated at \"at least prisoners and 260 guns.\" Liddell Hart considered that important aspects of the operation were the extent to which Ottoman commanders were denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority and air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, which paralyzed attempts to react to the rapidly deteriorating situation.\n\nFrench doctrine in the interwar years was defence-oriented. Colonel Charles de Gaulle was an advocate of concentration of armour and aeroplanes. His opinions were expressed in his book \"Vers l'Armée de Métier\" (Towards the Professional Army 1933). Like von Seeckt, he concluded that France could no longer maintain the huge armies of conscripts and reservists with which World War I had been fought, and he sought to use tanks, mechanised forces and aircraft to allow a smaller number of highly trained soldiers to have greater impact in battle. His views little endeared him to the French high command but are claimed by some to have influenced Heinz Guderian.\n\nIn 1916, General Alexei Brusilov had used surprise and infiltration tactics during the Brusilov Offensive. Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, Georgii Isserson and other members of the Red Army developed a concept of deep battle from the experience of the Polish–Soviet War. These concepts would guide Red Army doctrine throughout World War II. Realising the limitations of infantry and cavalry, Tukhachevsky was an advocate of mechanised formations and the large-scale industrialisation required. Robert Watt (2008) wrote that blitzkrieg holds little in common with Soviet deep battle. In 2002, H. P. Willmott had noted that deep battle contained two important differences: it was a doctrine of total war, not limited operations, and decisive battle was rejected in favour of several large, simultaneous offensives.\n\nThe \"Reichswehr\" and the Red Army began a secret collaboration in the Soviet Union to evade the Treaty of Versailles occupational agent, the Inter-Allied Commission. In 1926, War games and tests were begun at Kazan and Lipetsk. The centres were used to field test aircraft and armoured vehicles up to the battalion level and housed aerial and armoured warfare schools, through which officers were rotated.\n\nAfter becoming head of government in 1933, Adolf Hitler ignored the Versailles Treaty provisions. A command for armored forces was created within the German Wehrmacht: the \"Panzerwaffe\", as it came to be known later. The Luftwaffe (the German air force) was established, and development began on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines. Hitler was a strong supporter of this new strategy. He read Guderian's book \"Achtung – Panzer!\" and upon observing armoured field exercises at Kummersdorf he remarked, \"That is what I want – and that is what I will have.\"\n\nGuderian summarised combined-arms tactics as the way to get the mobile and motorised armoured divisions to work together and support each other to achieve decisive success. In his book, \"Panzer Leader\", he wrote:\n\nGuderian believed that developments in technology were required to support the theory; especially, equipping armoured divisions—tanks\nforemost–with wireless communications. Guderian insisted in 1933 to the high command that every tank in the German armoured force must be equipped with a radio. At the start of the war, only the German army was thus prepared with all tanks \"radio equipped\". This proved critical in early tank battles where German tank commanders exploited the organizational advantage over the Allies that radio communication gave them. Later all Allied armies would copy this innovation. During the Polish campaign, the performance of armoured troops, under the influence of Guderian's ideas, won over a number of skeptics who had initially expressed doubt about armoured warfare, such as von Rundstedt and Rommel.\n\nAccording to David A.Grossman, by the 12th Battle of Isonzo, while conducting a light infantry operation, Rommel had perfected his maneuver \nwarfare principles, which were the very same ones that were applied during the Blitzkrieg against France in 1940 (and repeated by the Allied grounded offensive against Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War)\nDuring the Battle of France, Hitler caused a confusion when he suddenly changed his ideas and ordered that everything should be completed in a few weeks (his original plan would have taken years to be completed), encouraging Rommel and Guderian to disobey their direct superiors' orders by forging ahead and, on the way, invented the idea of Blitzkrieg. It was Rommel who created the first archetype of Blitzkrieg, leading his division far ahead of flanking divisions. MacGregor and Williamson remark that Rommel's version of Blitzkrieg displayed a significantly better understanding of combined-arms warfare than that of Guderian. General Hoth submitted an official report which declared that Rommel had \"explored new paths in the command of Panzer divisions.\"\n\nThe Germans referred to a \"Schwerpunkt\" (focal point) and to a \"Schwerpunktprinzip\" (concentration principle) in the planning of operations, known as \"Schwerpunktbildung\". The \"Schwerpunkt\" was the centre of gravity, point of main effort, where a decisive result was to be achieved. Military force was concentrated at the \"Schwerpunkt\", regardless of the sacrifices it made necessary elsewhere. By local success at the \"Schwerpunkt\", a small force could achieve a breakthrough and gain advantages by fighting in the enemy rear. Guderian summarised this as \"Klotzen, nicht kleckern!\" (\"Kick, don't spatter them!\").\n\nTo break through, armoured forces would attack an opposing defensive line frontally, supported by motorised infantry, artillery fire and aerial bombardment, to create a breach. Tanks and other motorised units could break out of the fortified zone without the encumbrance of slow-moving infantry moving on foot. Air forces tried to gain air superiority by attacking opposing aircraft on the ground, bombing airfields and communications and seeking tactically advantageous positions from which to destroy them in the air. \"Schwerpunktbildung\" enabled the attacker to win numerical superiority at the point of main effort, which in turn gave the attacker tactical and operational superiority, even though the attacker may be numerically and strategically inferior in general.\n\nHaving achieved a breakthrough of the enemy's line, units comprising the \"Schwerpunkt\" were not supposed to become decisively engaged with enemy front line units to the right and left of the breakthrough area. Units pouring through the hole were to drive upon set objectives behind the enemy front line. In World War II, German Panzer forces used motorised mobility, to paralyse the opponent's ability to react. Fast-moving mobile forces seized the initiative, exploited weaknesses and acted before opposing forces could respond. Central to this was the decision cycle (tempo). Decision-making required time to gather information, make a decision, give orders to subordinates to implement the decision. Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could act quicker than the forces opposing them. Directive control was a fast and flexible method of command. Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior's intent and the role which his unit was to fill in this concept. The method of execution was then a matter for the discretion of the subordinate commander. Staff burden was reduced at the top and spread among tiers of command with knowledge about their situation. Delegation and the encouragement of initiative aided implementation, important decisions could be taken quickly and communicated verbally or with brief written orders. Germans soldiers also used Pervitin, a form of Amphetamine, which was given to drivers, to keep them awake.\n\nThe last part of an offensive operation was the destruction of un-subdued pockets of resistance, which had been enveloped earlier and by-passed by the fast-moving armoured and motorised spearheads. The \"Kesselschlacht\", (cauldron battle), was a concentric attack on such pockets. It was here that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the mass capture of prisoners and weapons. During Operation Barbarossa, huge encirclements in 1941 produced nearly 3.5 million Soviet prisoners, along with masses of equipment.\n\nClose air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber. They would support the focal point of attack from the air. German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German \"Luftwaffe\" was able to control the air war in early campaigns in Europe and the Soviet Union. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine, other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy. It was flexible and it was able to carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing. Flexibility was the \"Luftwaffe's\" strength in 1939–1941. Paradoxically, from that period onward it became its weakness. While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the \"Luftwaffe\" deployed its resources in a more general, operational way. It switched from air superiority missions, to medium-range interdiction, to strategic strikes, to close support duties depending on the need of the ground forces. In fact, far from it being a specialist panzer spearhead arm, fewer than 15 percent of the Luftwaffe was intended for close support of the army in 1939.\n\nThe concepts associated with the term \"blitzkrieg\"—deep penetrations by armour, large encirclements, and combined arms attacks—were largely dependent upon terrain and weather conditions. Where the ability for rapid movement across \"tank country\" was not possible, armoured penetrations were often avoided or resulted in failure. Terrain would ideally be flat, firm, unobstructed by natural barriers or fortifications, and interspersed with roads and railways. If it were instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armour would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed. Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow. Armour, motorised and aerial support was also naturally dependent on weather.\nIt should however be noted that the disadvantages of such terrain could be nullified if surprise was achieved over the enemy by an attack through such terrain. During the Battle of France, the German blitzkrieg-style attack on France went through the Ardennes. There is little doubt that the hilly, heavily wooded Ardennes could have been relatively easily defended by the Allies, even against the bulk of the German armoured units. However, precisely because the French thought the Ardennes unsuitable for massive troop movement, particularly for tanks, they were left with only light defences which were quickly overrun by the \"Wehrmacht\". The Germans quickly advanced through the forest, knocking down the trees the French thought would impede this tactic.\n\nThe influence of air forces over forces on the ground changed significantly over the course of the Second World War. Early German successes were conducted when Allied aircraft could not make a significant impact on the battlefield. In May 1940, there was near parity in numbers of aircraft between the Luftwaffe and the Allies, but the Luftwaffe had been developed to support Germany's ground forces, had liaison officers with the mobile formations, and operated a higher number of sorties per aircraft. In addition, German air parity or superiority allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, their unhindered assembly into concentrated attack formations, aerial reconnaissance, aerial resupply of fast moving formations and close air support at the point of attack. The Allied air forces had no close air support aircraft, training or doctrine. The Allies flew 434 French and 160 British sorties a day but methods of attacking ground targets had yet to be developed; therefore Allied aircraft caused negligible damage. Against these 600 sorties the Luftwaffe on average flew 1,500 sorties a day. On May 13, \"Fliegerkorps\" VIII flew 1,000 sorties in support of the crossing of the Meuse. The following day the Allies made repeated attempts to destroy the German pontoon bridges, but German fighter aircraft, ground fire and Luftwaffe flak batteries with the panzer forces destroyed 56 percent of the attacking Allied aircraft while the bridges remained intact.\n\nAllied air superiority became a significant hindrance to German operations during the later years of the war. By June 1944 the Western Allies had complete control of the air over the battlefield and their fighter-bomber aircraft were very effective at attacking ground forces. On D-Day the Allies flew 14,500 sorties over the battlefield area alone, not including sorties flown over north-western Europe. Against this on 6 June the Luftwaffe flew some 300 sorties. Though German fighter presence over Normandy increased over the next days and weeks, it never approached the numbers the Allies commanded. Fighter-bomber attacks on German formations made movement during daylight almost impossible. Subsequently, shortages soon developed in food, fuel and ammunition, severely hampering the German defenders. German vehicle crews and even flak units experienced great difficulty moving during daylight. Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimize interference by Allied aircraft. Under these conditions it was difficult for German commanders to employ the \"armoured idea\", if at all.\n\nBlitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and that does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area. This is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funnelling forces into the spearhead, or lacks the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack. If the defender can hold the shoulders of the breach they will have the opportunity to counter-attack into the flank of the attacker, potentially cutting off the van as happened to Kampfgruppe Peiper in the Ardennes.\n\nDuring the Battle of France in 1940, the 4th Armoured Division (Major-General Charles de Gaulle) and elements of the 1st Army Tank Brigade (British Expeditionary Force) made probing attacks on the German flank, pushing into the rear of the advancing armoured columns at times. This may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance. Those attacks combined with Maxime Weygand's Hedgehog tactic would become the major basis for responding to blitzkrieg attacks in the future: deployment in depth, permitting enemy or \"shoulders\" of a penetration was essential to channelling the enemy attack, and artillery, properly employed at the shoulders, could take a heavy toll of attackers. While Allied forces in 1940 lacked the experience to successfully develop these strategies, resulting in France's capitulation with heavy losses, they characterised later Allied operations. At the Battle of Kursk the Red Army employed a combination of defence in great depth, extensive minefields, and tenacious defence of breakthrough shoulders. In this way they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced. The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944. German attempts to weather the storm and fight out of encirclements failed due to the Russian ability to continue to feed armoured units into the attack, maintaining the mobility and strength of the offensive, arriving in force deep in the rear areas, faster than the Germans could regroup and resulted in the destruction of Army Group Center in Operation Bagration.\n\nAlthough effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years. Strategies based on manoeuvre have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines, and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front (as opposed to, for example, the Dutch who had no territory to sacrifice). Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany; indeed, late in the war many panzer \"divisions\" had no more than a few dozen tanks. As the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade. Although production of \"Luftwaffe\" fighter aircraft continued, they would be unable to fly for lack of fuel. What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then they were not able to operate normally. Of those Tiger tanks lost against the United States Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel.\n\nGerman volunteers first used armour in live field conditions during the Spanish Civil War of 1936. Armour commitment consisted of Panzer Battalion 88, a force built around three companies of Panzer I tanks that functioned as a training cadre for Nationalists. The Luftwaffe deployed squadrons of fighters, dive bombers and transport aircraft as the \"Condor Legion\". Guderian said that the tank deployment was \"on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made.\" The true test of his \"armoured idea\" would have to wait for the Second World War. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" also provided volunteers to Spain to test both tactics and aircraft in combat, including the first combat use of the \"Stuka\".\n\nDuring the war, the \"Condor Legion\" undertook the bombing of Guernica which had a tremendous psychological effect on the populations of Europe. The results were exaggerated, and the Western Allies concluded that the \"city-busting\" techniques were now a part of the German way in war. The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges. But lacking the ability to hit them with accuracy (only three or four Ju 87s saw action in Spain), a method of carpet bombing was chosen resulting in heavy civilian casualties.\n\nDespite the term \"blitzkrieg\" being coined by journalists during the Invasion of Poland of 1939, historians Matthew Cooper and J. P. Harris have written that German operations during it were consistent with traditional methods. The Wehrmacht strategy was more in line with \"Vernichtungsgedanken\" a focus on envelopment to create pockets in broad-front annihilation. Panzer forces were dispersed among the three German concentrations with little emphasis on independent use, being used to create or destroy close pockets of Polish forces and seize operational-depth terrain in support of the largely un-motorized infantry which followed.\n\nWhile early German tanks, Stuka dive-bombers and concentrated forces were used in the Polish campaign, the majority of the battle was conventional infantry and artillery warfare and most Luftwaffe action was independent of the ground campaign. Matthew Cooper wrote that\n\nJohn Ellis wrote that \"...there is considerable justice in Matthew Cooper's assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of \"strategic\" mission that was to characterize authentic armoured blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies.\" Steven Zaloga wrote, \"Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzer and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units. Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht.\"\n\nThe German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (\"Fall Gelb\") and Operation Red (\"Fall Rot\"). Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armoured corps and paratroopers. Most of the German armoured forces were placed in Panzer Group von Kleist, which attacked through the Ardennes, a lightly defended sector that the French planned to reinforce if need be, before the Germans could bring up heavy and siege artillery. There was no time for such a reinforcement to be sent, for the Germans did not wait for siege artillery but reached the Meuse and achieved a breakthrough at the Battle of Sedan in three days.\n\nThe group raced to the English Channel, reaching the coast at Abbeville and cut off the BEF, the Belgian Army and some of the best-equipped divisions of the French Army in northern France. Armoured and motorised units under Guderian, Rommel and others, advanced far beyond the marching and horse-drawn infantry divisions and far in excess of that with which Hitler and the German high command expected or wished. When the Allies counter-attacked at Arras using the heavily armoured British Matilda I and Matilda II tanks, a brief panic was created in the German High Command. The armoured and motorised forces were halted by Hitler outside the port of Dunkirk, which was being used to evacuate the Allied forces. Hermann Göring promised that the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies but aerial operations failed to prevent the evacuation of the majority of the Allied troops. In Operation Dynamo some French and British troops escaped.\n\nCase Yellow surprised everyone, overcoming the Allies' 4,000 armoured vehicles, many of which were better than German equivalents in armour and gun-power. The French and British frequently used their tanks in the dispersed role of infantry support rather than concentrating force at the point of attack, to create overwhelming firepower.\nThe French armies were much reduced in strength and the confidence of their commanders shaken. With much of their own armour and heavy equipment lost in Northern France, they lacked the means to fight a mobile war. The Germans followed their initial success with Operation Red, a triple-pronged offensive. The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon and the XIX Panzer Corps encircled the Maginot Line. The French were hard pressed to organise any sort of counter-attack and were continually ordered to form new defensive lines and found that German forces had already by-passed them and moved on. An armoured counter-attack organised by Colonel de Gaulle could not be sustained and he had to retreat.\n\nPrior to the German offensive in May, Winston Churchill had said \"Thank God for the French Army\". That same French army collapsed after barely two months of fighting. This was in shocking contrast to the four years of trench warfare they had engaged in during the First World War. The French president of the Ministerial Council, Reynaud, attributed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:\n\nThe Germans had not used paratroop attacks in France and only made one big drop in the Netherlands, to capture three bridges; some small glider-landings were conducted in Belgium to tank bottle-necks on routes of advance before the arrival of the main force (the most renowned being the landing on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium).\n\nUse of armoured forces was crucial for both sides on the Eastern Front. Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, involved a number of breakthroughs and encirclements by motorised forces. Its goal according to Führer Directive 21 (18 December 1940) was \"to destroy the Russian forces deployed in the West and to prevent their escape into the wide-open spaces of Russia.\" The Red Army was to be destroyed west of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers, which were about east of the Soviet border, to be followed by a mopping-up operation. The surprise attack resulted in the near annihilation of the Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily (VVS, Soviet Air Force) by simultaneous attacks on airfields, allowing the Luftwaffe to achieve total air supremacy over all the battlefields within the first week. On the ground, four German panzer groups outflanked and encircled disorganised Red Army units, while the marching infantry completed the encirclements and defeated the trapped forces. In late July, after 2nd Panzer Group (commanded by Guderian) captured the watersheds of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers near Smolensk, the panzers had to defend the encirclement, because the marching infantry divisions were still hundreds of kilometres to the west.\n\nThe Germans conquered large areas of the Soviet Union but their failure to destroy the Red Army before the winter of 1941 was a strategic failure that made German tactical superiority and territorial gains irrelevant. The Red Army had survived enormous losses and regrouped with new formations far to the rear of the front line. During the Battle of Moscow, the Red Army defeated the German Army Group Center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative.\n\nIn the summer of 1942, Germany launched another offensive in the southern USSR against Stalingrad and the Caucasus, the Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter. German gains were ultimately limited by Hitler diverting forces from the attack on Stalingrad and driving towards the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously. The \"Wehrmacht\" became overstretched, although winning operationally, it could not inflict a decisive defeat as the durability of the Soviet Union's manpower, resources, industrial base and aid from the Western Allies began to take effect.\n\nIn July 1943 the \"Wehrmacht\" conducted Operation (Citadel) against a salient at Kursk that was heavily defended by Soviet troops. Soviet defensive tactics were by now hugely improved, particularly in the use of artillery and air support. By April 1943, the Stavka had learned of German intentions through intelligence supplied by front line reconnaissance and Ultra intercepts. In the following months, the Red Army constructed deep defensive belts along the paths of the planned German attack. The Soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of German plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations, and the German commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced.\n\nThe Germans did not achieve surprise and were not able to outflank or break through into enemy rear areas during the operation. Several historians assert that Operation Citadel was planned and intended to be a blitzkrieg operation. Many of the German participants who wrote about the operation after the war, including Manstein, make no mention of blitzkrieg in their accounts. In 2000, Niklas Zetterling and Anders Frankson characterised only the southern pincer of the German offensive as a \"classical blitzkrieg attack\". Pier Battistelli wrote that the operational planning marked a change in German offensive thinking away from blitzkrieg and that more priority was given to brute force and fire power than to speed and manoeuvre.\n\nIn 1995, David Glantz stated that for the first time, blitzkrieg was defeated in summer and the opposing Soviet forces were able to mount a successful counter-offensive. The Battle of Kursk ended with two Soviet counter-offensives and the revival of deep operations. In the summer of 1944, the Red Army destroyed Army Group Centre in Operation Bagration, using combined-arms tactics for armour, infantry and air power in a coordinated strategic assault, known as deep operations, which led to an advance of in six weeks.\n\nAllied armies began using combined arms formations and deep penetration strategies that Germany had used in the opening years of the war. Many Allied operations in the Western Desert and on the Eastern Front, relied on firepower to establish breakthroughs by fast-moving armoured units. These artillery-based tactics were also decisive in Western Front operations after Operation Overlord and the British Commonwealth and American armies developed flexible and powerful systems for using artillery support. What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of rocket launchers, guns and mortars. The Germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations their enemies were capable of by 1944.\n\nAfter the Allied landings at Normandy, the Germans began a counter-offensive to overwhelm the landing force with armoured attacks but these failed for lack of co-ordination and Allied superiority in anti-tank defence and in the air. The most notable attempt to use deep penetration operations in Normandy was Operation Luttich at Mortain, which only hastened the Falaise Pocket and the destruction of German forces in Normandy. The Mortain counter-attack was defeated by the US 12th Army Group with little effect on its own offensive operations.\n\nThe last German offensive on the Western front, the Battle of the Bulge (Operation \"Wacht am Rhein\"), was an offensive launched towards the port of Antwerp in December 1944. Launched in poor weather against a thinly held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air power was grounded by cloud cover. Determined defence by US troops in places throughout the Ardennes, the lack of good roads and German supply shortages caused delays. Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft returned to the battlefield. Allied counter-attacks soon forced back the Germans, who abandoned much equipment for lack of fuel.\n\nThe origins of blitzkrieg are in some doubt: if it existed, who contributed to it, whether it was part of German war strategy from 1933–1939. There has been a great deal of debate about whether it existed as a coherent military strategy. Many historians now think that blitzkrieg was not a military theory and the campaigns conducted by the Germans from 1939 to circa 1942 (with the exception of Operation Barbarossa) were improvised, rather than being based on a particular military strategy. Blitzkrieg had been called a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) but many writers and historians have concluded that the Germans did not invent a new form of warfare but applied new technologies to traditional ideas of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (manoeuvre warfare) to achieve decisive victory.\n\nIn 1965, Captain Robert O'Neill, Professor of the History of War at the Oxford University produced an example of the popular view. In \"Doctrine and Training in the German Army 1919–1939\", O'Neill wrote\n\nOther historians wrote that blitzkrieg was an operational doctrine of the German armed forces and a strategic concept on which the leadership of the \"Third Reich\" based its strategic and economic planning. Military planners and bureaucrats in the war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term \"blitzkrieg\" in official documents. That the German army had a \"blitzkrieg doctrine\" was rejected in the late 1970s by Matthew Cooper. The concept of a blitzkrieg \"Luftwaffe\" was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s. That the \"Third Reich\" went to war on the basis of \"blitzkrieg economics\" was criticised by Richard Overy in the 1980s and George Raudzens described the contradictory senses in which historians have used the word. The notion of a German blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survives in popular history and many historians still support the thesis.\n\nFrieser wrote that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German army concluded that decisive battles were no longer possible in the changed conditions of the twentieth century. Frieser wrote that the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), which was created in 1938 had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long war of exhaustion (\"ermattungskrieg\"). It was only after the improvised plan for the Battle of France in 1940 was unexpectedly successful, that the German General Staff came to believe that \"vernichtungskrieg\" was still feasible. German thinking reverted to the possibility of a quick and decisive war for the Balkan Campaign and Operation Barbarossa.\n\nMost academic historians regard the notion of blitzkrieg as military doctrine to be a myth. Shimon Naveh wrote \"The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations\". Naveh described it as an \"ad hoc solution\" to operational dangers, thrown together at the last moment. Overy disagreed with the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war, because the once popular belief that the Nazi state organised their economy to carry out its grand strategy in short campaigns was false. Hitler had intended for a rapid unlimited war to occur much later than 1939, but the \"Third Reich's\" aggressive foreign policy forced the Nazi state into war before it was ready. Hitler and the \"Wehrmacht's\" planning in the 1930s did not reflect a blitzkrieg method but the opposite. John Harris wrote that the Wehrmacht never used the word, and it did not appear in German army or air force field manuals; the word was coined in September 1939, by a \"Times\" newspaper reporter. Harris also found no evidence that German military thinking developed a blitzkrieg mentality. Karl-Heinz Frieser and Adam Tooze reached similar conclusions to Overy and Naveh, that the notions of blitzkrieg-economy and strategy were myths. Frieser wrote that surviving German economists and General Staff officers denied that Germany went to war with a blitzkrieg strategy. Robert M. Citino argues:\n\nIn the 1960s, Alan Milward developed a theory of blitzkrieg economics, that Germany could not fight a long war and chose to avoid comprehensive rearmament and armed in breadth, to win quick victories. Milward described an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy. The purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the German people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities and avoid the economic hardships of the First World War.\n\nOvery wrote that blitzkrieg as a \"coherent military and economic concept has proven a difficult strategy to defend in light of the evidence\". Milward's theory was contrary to Hitler's and German planners' intentions. The Germans, aware of the errors of the First World War, rejected the concept of organising its economy to fight only a short war. Therefore, focus was given to the development of armament in depth for a long war, instead of armament in breadth for a short war. Hitler claimed that relying on surprise alone was \"criminal\" and that \"we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack\". During the winter of 1939–40, Hitler demobilised many troops from the army to return as skilled workers to factories because the war would be decided by production, not a quick \"Panzer operation\".\n\nIn the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited. In November 1937 Hitler had indicated that most of the armament projects would be completed by 1943–45. The rearmament of the \"Kriegsmarine\" was to have been completed in 1949 and the \"Luftwaffe\" rearmament program was to have matured in 1942, with a force capable of strategic bombing with heavy bombers. The construction and training of motorised forces and a full mobilisation of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944 respectively. Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced Germany into war before rearmament was complete.\n\nAfter the war, Albert Speer claimed that the German economy achieved greater armaments output, not because of diversions of capacity from civilian to military industry but through streamlining of the economy. Richard Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939. Between 1937 and 1939, 70 percent of investment capital went into the rubber, synthetic fuel, aircraft and shipbuilding industries. Hermann Göring had consistently stated that the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war. Hitler's correspondence with his economists also reveals that his intent was to wage war in 1943–1945, when the resources of central Europe had been absorbed into the \"Third Reich\".\n\nLiving standards were not high in the late 1930s. Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938. The demands of the war economy reduced the amount of spending in non-military sectors to satisfy the demand for the armed forces. On 9 September, Göring as Head of the \"Reich Defence Council\", called for complete \"employment\" of living and fighting power of the national economy for the duration of the war. Overy presents this as evidence that a \"blitzkrieg economy\" did not exist.\n\nAdam Tooze wrote that the German economy was being prepared for a long war. The expenditure for this war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain. The German leadership were concerned less with how to balance the civilian economy and the needs of civilian consumption but to figure out how to best prepare the economy for total war. Once war had begun, Hitler urged his economic experts to abandon caution and expend all available resources on the war effort but the expansion plans only gradually gained momentum in 1941. Tooze wrote that the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy.\n\nFrieser wrote that the () was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war. A blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanised army. In 1939–40, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old and 50 percent of the soldiers had only a few weeks' training. The German army, contrary to the blitzkrieg legend, was not fully motorised and had only 120,000 vehicles, compared to the 300,000 of the French Army. The British also had an \"enviable\" contingent of motorised forces. Thus, \"the image of the German 'Blitzkrieg' army is a figment of propaganda imagination\". During the First World War the German army used 1.4 million horses for transport and in the Second World War used 2.7 million horses; only ten percent of the army was motorised in 1940.\n\nHalf of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready but less well-equipped than the British and French or the Imperial German Army of 1914. In the spring of 1940, the German army was semi-modern, in which a small number of well-equipped and \"elite\" divisions were offset by many second and third rate divisions\". In 2003, John Mosier wrote that while the French soldiers in 1940 were better trained than German soldiers, as were the Americans later and that the German army was the least mechanised of the major armies, its leadership cadres were larger and better and that the high standard of leadership was the main reason for the successes of the German army in World War II, as it had been in World War I.\n\nJames Corum wrote that it was a myth that the \"Luftwaffe\" had a doctrine of terror bombing, in which civilians were attacked to break the will or aid the collapse of an enemy, by the \"Luftwaffe\" in \"Blitzkrieg\" operations. After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and the Rotterdam Blitz in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of \"Luftwaffe\" doctrine. During the interwar period the \"Luftwaffe\" leadership rejected the concept of terror bombing in favour of battlefield support and interdiction operations.\n\nCorum continues: General Walther Wever compiled a doctrine known as \"The Conduct of the Aerial War\". This document, which the \"Luftwaffe\" adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet's theory of terror bombing. Terror bombing was deemed to be \"counter-productive\", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the \"Luftwaffe's\" main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks.\n\nJ. P. Harris wrote that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed (as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States) that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that\n\nThe Luftwaffe did end up with an air force consisting mainly of relatively short-range aircraft, but this does not prove that the German air force was solely interested in ’tactical’ bombing. It happened because the German aircraft industry lacked the experience to build a long-range bomber fleet quickly, and because Hitler was insistent on the very rapid creation of a numerically large force. It is also significant that Germany's position in the centre of Europe to a large extent obviated the need to make a clear distinction between bombers suitable only for ’tactical’ and those necessary for strategic purposes in the early stages of a likely future war.\n\nBritish theorists John Frederick Charles Fuller and Captain Basil Henry Liddell Hart have often been associated with the development of blitzkrieg, though this is a matter of controversy. In recent years historians have uncovered that Liddell Hart distorted and falsified facts to make it appear as if his ideas were adopted. After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions, after the event, claiming that the mobile tank warfare practised by the \"Wehrmacht\" was a result of his influence. By manipulation and contrivance, Liddell Hart distorted the actual circumstances of the blitzkrieg formation, and he obscured its origins. Through his indoctrinated idealisation of an ostentatious concept, he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg. By imposing, retrospectively, his own perceptions of mobile warfare upon the shallow concept of blitzkrieg, he \"created a theoretical imbroglio that has taken 40 years to unravel.\" Blitzkrieg was not an official doctrine and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion that it did not exist as such.\n\nThe early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian. The main evidence of Liddell Hart's deceit and \"tendentious\" report of history can be found in his letters to Erich von Manstein, Heinz Guderian and the relatives and associates of Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart, in letters to Guderian, \"imposed his own fabricated version of blitzkrieg on the latter and compelled him to proclaim it as original formula\". Kenneth Macksey found Liddell Hart's original letters to Guderian in the General's papers, requesting that Guderian give him credit for \"impressing him\" with his ideas of armoured warfare. When Liddell Hart was questioned about this in 1968 and the discrepancy between the English and German editions of Guderian's memoirs, \"he gave a conveniently unhelpful though strictly truthful reply. ('There is nothing about the matter in my file of correspondence with Guderian himself except...that I thanked him...for what he said in that additional paragraph'.)\".\n\nDuring World War I, Fuller had been a staff officer attached to the new tank corps. He developed Plan 1919 for massive, independent tank operations, which he claimed were subsequently studied by the German military. It is variously argued that Fuller's wartime plans and post-war writings were an inspiration or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention. The German view of themselves as the losers of the war, may be linked to the senior and experienced officers' undertaking a thorough review, studying and rewriting of all their Army doctrine and training manuals.\n\nFuller and Liddell Hart were \"outsiders\": Liddell Hart was unable to serve as a soldier after 1916 after being gassed on the Somme and Fuller's abrasive personality resulted in his premature retirement in 1933. Their views had limited impact in the British army; the War Office permitted the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, lorried infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorised engineers but the force was disbanded in 1928 on the grounds that it had served its purpose. A new experimental brigade was intended for the next year and became a permanent formation in 1933, during the cuts of the financial years.\n\nIt has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new; the Germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s. Rather the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German wars of unification. The first European general to introduce rapid movement, concentrated power and integrated military effort was Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years' War. The appearance of the aircraft and tank in the First World War, called an RMA, offered the German military a chance to get back to the traditional war of movement as practised by Moltke the Elder. The so-called \"blitzkrieg campaigns\" of 1939 – circa 1942, were well within that operational context.\n\nAt the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war. The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century. J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short, decisive campaigns – but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions. The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second, was partly the employment of a relatively small number of mechanised divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force.\n\nHeinz Guderian is widely regarded as being highly influential in developing the military methods of warfare used by Germany's tank men at the start of the Second World War. This style of warfare brought manoeuvre back to the fore, and placed an emphasis on the offensive. This style, along with the shockingly rapid collapse in the armies that opposed it, came to be branded as blitzkrieg warfare.\n\nFollowing Germany's military reforms of the 1920s, Heinz Guderian emerged as a strong proponent of mechanised forces. Within the Inspectorate of Transport Troops, Guderian and colleagues performed theoretical and field exercise work. Guderian met with opposition from some in the General Staff, who were distrustful of the new weapons and who continued to view the infantry as the primary weapon of the army. Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (1935–38), whom he alleged was sceptical that armoured forces could be decisive. This claim has been disputed by later historians. James Corum wrote:\n\nBy Guderian's account he single-handedly created the German tactical and operational methodology. Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote a number of articles concerning military movement. As the ideas of making use of the combustible engine in a protected encasement to bring mobility back to warfare developed in the German army, Guderian was a leading proponent of the formations that would be used for this purpose. He was later asked to write an explanatory book, which was titled \"Achtung Panzer!\" (1937). In it he explained the theories of the tank men and defended them.\n\nGuderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war. \"If the tanks succeed, then victory follows\", he wrote. In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote \"until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanks—properly employed, needless to say—are today the best means available for land attack.\" Addressing the faster rate at which defenders could reinforce an area than attackers could penetrate it during the First World War, Guderian wrote that \"since reserve forces will now be motorized, the building up of new defensive fronts is easier than it used to be; the chances of an offensive based on the timetable of artillery and infantry co-operation are, as a result, even slighter today than they were in the last war.\" He continued, \"We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, and—what is perhaps even more important—that we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made.\" Guderian additionally required that tactical radios be widely used to facilitate co-ordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.\n\nGuderian's leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalised by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s. Guderian's book incorporated the work of theorists such as Ludwig Ritter von Eimannsberger, whose book, \"The Tank War\" (\"Der Kampfwagenkrieg\") (1934) gained a wide audience in the German army. Another German theorist, Ernst Volckheim, wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics and was influential to German thinking on the use of armoured formations but his work was not acknowledged in Guderian's writings.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4653", "title": "The Beano", "text": "The Beano\n\nThe Beano is the longest running Scottish children's comic, published by DC Thomson. The comic first appeared on 30 July 1938, and was published weekly. In September 2009, \"The Beano\"'s 3,500th issue was published. One of the best selling comics in British popular culture, along with \"The Dandy\", the weekly circulation of \"The Beano\" in April 1950 was 1,974,072. \"The Beano\" is currently edited by Craig Graham. Each issue is published on a Wednesday, with the issue date being that of the following Saturday.\n\nIts characters include \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"The Bash Street Kids\", \"The Numskulls\", \"Roger the Dodger\", \"Billy Whizz\" and \"Ball Boy\". Earlier characters who have been phased out include \"Ivy the Terrible\", \"Calamity James\", \"The Three Bears\" and \"Pansy Potter\". Some old characters, like \"Biffo the Bear\", \"Lord Snooty\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"Little Plum\", have more recently made a return as \"funsize\" quarter-page strips.\n\nThe style of \"Beano\" humour has shifted noticeably over the years, though the longstanding tradition of anarchic humour has remained. For decades strips have appeared to glorify immoral behaviour, e.g. pranking (\"Dennis the Menace\"), dishonesty (\"Roger the Dodger\") and even robbery (\"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"The Three Bears\"). Although the readers' sympathies are assumed to be with the miscreants, the latter are very often shown punished for their actions. Recent years have seen a rise in humour involving gross bodily functions, especially flatulence (which would have been taboo in children's comics prior to the 1990s), while depictions of corporal punishment have declined. For example, the literal slipper (Dennis the Menace's father's instrument of chastisement) has become the name of the local chief of police (Sergeant Slipper).\n\nIn 1921, D. C. Thomson had first entered the field of boys' story papers with \"Adventure\". The success of this paper led to five further publications, \"The Rover\" and \"The Wizard\" in 1922, \"The Vanguard\" in 1924, \"The Skipper\" in 1930 and \"The Hotspur\" in 1933. Although \"The Vanguard\" folded in 1926, the others were a great triumph and became known as \"The Big Five\"; they ended Amalgamated Press's near-monopoly of the British comic industry.\n\nAnother success was the \"Fun Section\" of D. C. Thomson's Scottish weekly newspaper \"The Sunday Post\", which included the two strips \"Oor Wullie\" and \"The Broons\" by lead artist Dudley Watkins, as well as other funnies and various puzzles and adventure stories. This gave R. D. Low, the head of children's publications at D. C. Thomson at the time, the idea to create another Big Five, this time of comics intended for both boys and girls and consisting mainly of 'funnies' and more lighthearted adventure and text stories. The first of these publications, \"The Dandy\", commenced in 1937 and was followed by \"The Beano\" on 26 July 1938. (\"The Beano\" comic takes its name from the English word \"beano\" which can be loosely interpreted as \"a good time\".) A third paper, \"The Magic Comic\", aimed at a slightly younger audience, followed in July 1939, but ceased publication in early 1941, due to paper rationing. Wartime shortages also prevented the New Big Five project from being completed.\n\nThe first edition of \"The Beano\" was dated 30 July 1938. A facsimile of the first issue's cover was printed on the back of issue No. 2,000. There are only 12 known copies of the first issue in existence, and only five known copies of the second issue (not including facsimiles). A copy of the first issue sold for £12,100 on 16 March 2004, which was at the time thought to be the highest price ever paid for a British comic at an auction. (The current highest price is £20,350, which was paid for the first issue of \"The Dandy\" on 7 September 2004.)\n\nDuring the Second World War, \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\" were published on alternating weeks because of paper and ink rationing. D. C. Thomson's other publications also suffered, with the \"Oor Wullie\" and \"The Broons\" annuals falling victim to paper and ink shortages. Paper and ink supplies were fully restored shortly after the end of hostilities and weekly publication of \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\" resumed in 1949.\n\nThe 3,000th issue of \"The Beano\" was published in January 2000. \"The Beano\" is now the longest-running weekly comic, since \"The Dandy\" became a fortnightly comic in 2007.\n\n\"The Beano\"'s weekly circulation in April 1950 was 1,974,072; it currently sells slightly over 31,000 copies per week.\n\n\"The Beano\" is so popular that it had its own section of the Chessington World of Adventures theme park, \"Beanoland\". This opened in 2000 and survived for a decade before sponsorship was eventually lost. Most of the major Beanoland attractions remain in operation today but have been rethemed as \"Wild Asia\".\n\nOn 19 March 2012 Royal Mail launched a special stamp collection to celebrate Britain's rich comic book history. The collection featured \"The Beano\", \"The Dandy\", \"Eagle\", \"The Topper\", \"Roy of the Rovers\", \"Bunty\", \"Buster\", \"Valiant\", \"Twinkle\" and \"2000 AD\".\n\nThe original editor was George Moonie from 1938–59; followed by Harold Cramond from 1959-84.\n\nEuan Kerr was editor from 1984 until he handed over the reins to Alan Digby in early 2006. Digby had been \"Beano\" Chief Sub Editor when Kerr first became editor, and later edited \"The Beezer\". Kerr has returned to edit \"BeanoMAX\" as of issue 2 (see below). Following the retirement of Kerr, Digby took over as Editor-in-Chief of both titles. Digby retired in 2011, leaving Michael Stirling as the new editor.\n\nThe latest editor of \"The Beano\" is Craig Graham, who joined \"The Beano\" once \"The Dandy\" announced its closure. Upon his arrival as editor he has made many changes to \"The Beano\", and has already revamped the publication twice, despite only becoming editor in August 2012.\n\n\nThe \"Beano\"'s first major revamp was in the 50th birthday issue of 1988, when the page number was increased, the comic had a wider paper style, and more colour was used throughout. Another occurred in issue 2,674, dated 16 October 1993, when the whole comic was now printed in full colour, along with some new strips such as \"The Numskulls\", which had been moved from \"The Beezer\".\n\nNo major revamps happened from then until 1998, when Dennis' baby sister Bea was born. The logo was rounded and embossed (but later flattened in February 1999), and there were 8 extra pages. Computers were starting to be used for articles and speech bubbles, rather than the usual hand drawn ones.\n\nSince April 2007, \"The Beano\" has had five revamps to help it keep up to date. The first occurred on 7 April 2007. The logo was raised using a heavy black drop shadow, and the body of the lettering and its yellow trim were separated by a subtle 3D groove effect. The website address was looped inside the \"O\". This logo had been used in the Beano Club for one issue in 2006. Two new comic strips were introduced, these being \"The Riot Squad\" and \"Fred's Bed\", reprints from \"Hoot\" and \"The Beezer\" and \"Topper\" respectively. There was a record number of uncredited reprints, with the likes of \"Ivy the Terrible\", \"Calamity James\", \"Les Pretend\" also being reprinted. In certain areas of the UK, such as Lancashire, the price was increased to 99p, while elsewhere it remained as 85p.\n\nThe second happened on 27 October 2007. The logo was still grooved, but was now back to the rounded style which it had from 1999 to 2006. It was quite similar to the original rounded logo from 1998, which was flattened the following year.<br>\nThe number of reprint pages was cut from 4 to 2, but more started to appear after about a month. Two new strips were also added, \"Johnny Bean from Happy Bunny Green\" and \"London B412\". The price increased to 99p across the whole UK.\n\nThe third was the least major revamp. The background was changed from one colour behind the logo and another behind the Dennis strip to one single colour or a pattern, such as red and black stripes. New fonts were being used on the front cover, and the \"Pocket money price\" logo had been changed to a large \"WOW! 99p\" which was usually placed in the top corners. No new strips were added this time, but the amount of reprints went up to 5, sometimes lowering back to 4 per week, and an extra \"Dennis\" strip was added on the inside back two pages.\n\nThe fourth revamp, which happened with the issue dated 18 October 2008 is the most major revamp to date. There was a return of \"Billy the Cat\" inside, as well as a new \"Super School\" strip by Lew Stringer. The price rose to £1.25 per issue. Different characters appear on the 'O' each week in a cleaner and tidier embossed logo. New headline fonts were introduced (CCZoinks), the balloon font was also changed to Cloudsplitter by Blambot. But the main change was the paper style, which had finally changed from newsprint to a glossy paper, much in the style of the inside pages of the then companion papers \"Dandy Xtreme\" and \"BeanoMAX\". The only difference between these paper styles is the front cover, which was thicker on the \"Dandy Xtreme\" and \"BeanoMAX\", but the same as the pages throughout in the weekly \"Beano\".\n\nAs of late 2010, \"The Beano\" is printed by BGP and the comic is now in an A4 format. A mild revision of style accompanies this with balloon font changed to CCTimeSaleLower, an upper and lower case font and a much larger Beano logo on the cover. The font CCZoinks appears to have less prominence with CreativeBlockBold taking centre stage. The Beano Club was closed down in 2010 and its pages changed to Beano VIP with more online presence. The paper is still glossy, but the paper stock gives it a matte feel. At the start of 2011, the Beano VIP pages were dropped from the comic, but the online features remain.\n\nIn the issue dated 12 October 2011, there was another revamp. The comic was expanded to 36 pages, and the paper stock was made smoother. The \"Number 13\" and \"The Germs\" strips returned as reprints. A reader's page was also reintroduced, this time titled the Menace Gallery. After two appearances, this was renamed \"The Treehouse\".\n\nIn the issue dated 28 January 2012, \"The Beano\"'s cover changed. The logo was now more like the logo from 1972-1998, but with \"The\" inside the B much like later versions of the logo. The special \"O\"s that had appeared sometimes in the last year were also kept. The first panel of the Dennis & Gnasher strip also appeared on the cover, like from 1972-2008, but the \"This Week In Beanotown\" feature still appeared across the bottom.\n\nIn late 2012, Craig Graham took over as Beano editor and revamped the comic. As a result, two mini-strip pages titled 'Funsize Funnies' were introduced and featured \"Simply Smiffy\", \"Rasher\", \"Little Plum\", \"Les Pretend\", \"Pup Parade\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" as well as two new strips \"Gnash Gnews\" and Winston and also introduced artists such as Wilbur Dawbarn (who took over Billy Whizz from Nick Brennan), Lew Stringer (not seen in the Beano since Super School), Alexander Matthews, Paul Palmer and Nigel Auchterlounie. Auchterlounie soon took over writing \"Dennis the Menace and Gnasher\" also which had returned to its pre-2009 style with new characters from the 2009 TV series. In January 2013, \"Biffo the Bear\", \"Pansy Potter\", \"Lord Snooty\" and \"Gnipper\" were added to the Funsize Funnies, introducing Graham Howie to the Beano and being the return of Wayne Thompson. Later that year, two new comic strips were added called \"Big Time Charlie\" and \"Tricky Dicky\" (relaunch of the classic Topper star) and \"Stunt Gran\", \"BamBeanos\", \"BSK CCTV\" joined the Funsize Funnies replacing Gnash Gnews, Pup Parade and Pansy Potter. Puzzle pages frequently appeared in the comic now, with Jamie Smart and Lew Stringer originally drawing the puzzles, and later on other artists such as Steve Beckett and Barrie Appleby.\n\nAs a celebration, in partnership with the CLIC Sargent charity, 2 August 2008 was Gnashional Menace Day, where children were sponsored to behave like Dennis. The anniversary was also celebrated with a 40-page issue (instead of 32 pages; the 60th birthday issue also had extra pages, 48 instead of 24) guest edited by \"Wallace and Gromit\" creator Nick Park, price £1.50 (not 99p) and an issue of Classics from the Comics devoted to the Beano. There is also a special 64-page book available, \"The Beano Special Collectors Edition: 70 Years of Fun\", giving a brief history of the comic. In the Beano's home city of Dundee, a special exhibition was held at the University of Dundee featuring original artwork and other memorabilia loaned from D.C. Thomson - it ran until 20 September 2008. In London the Cartoon Museum showed the exhibition \"Beano and Dandy Birthday Bash!\" from 30 July to 2 November 2008, featuring original artwork from all eight decades of both \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\", including work by Dudley D. Watkins, David Law, Leo Baxendale and Ken Reid as well as David Sutherland and many contemporary artists. There were events for children throughout August.\nThere was also a special coffee table book called \"\", published by Waverly Books.\n\nIn the 75th Anniversary Special, \"The Beano\" had yet another revamp introducing celebrities as regular characters. As a result, all of the Funsize Funnies as well as the two new recently added comic strips \"Tricky Dicky\" and \"Big Time Charlie\" plus the reprinted \"Calamity James\" were all dropped. \"Bananaman\" came out of Geering reprints after being in them for over a year with Wayne Thompson reprising the role of artist after drawing him previously in \"The Dandy\" from 2010-12. \"Roger the Dodger\" was taken over by Jamie Smart and \"Ball Boy\" was taken over by Alexander Matthews and completely relaunched. Nigel Auchterlounie also took over as scriptwriter of \"The Bash Street Kids\" and \"Bananaman\", as well as now both writing and drawing \"The Numskulls\" which itself had had a huge relaunch with one-off celebrities replacing the role of Edd starting with Ant and Dec.\n\n12-year-old artist Zoom Rockman also joined \"The Beano\" in this issue, drawing \"Skanky Pigeon\" which appeared monthly. In the issue after the 75th Anniversary Special, fourteen new comic strips joined \"The Beano\" with twelve of these becoming the new Funsize Funnies stories, all of which are parodies of either a celebrity or television show: \"High School Moozical\", \"Neigh-Bours\", \"Celebrity Believe It or Not\", \"I Pity the School\", \"Murs Attacks\", \"Ashley's Banjo\", \"Coronation Bleat\", \"Jose's Back\", \"Simon's Bowel\", \"Guess Who?\", \"Watch-Hog\" and \"Danny Diddly O'Donoghue\" as well as two new one-page stories to replace \"Tricky Dicky\" and \"Big Time Charlie\": \"El Poco Loco\" and \"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turkeys\".\n\nStu Munro also took over as both puzzle page artist (as he did in \"The Dandy\") and \"The Dandy's Madvertisements\" were brought back with Stu Munro once again drawing them. Since the 75th Anniversary Special revamp, \"The Beano\" has now gained Andy Fanton, Stephen Waller, Dean Rankine, Garry Davies and Rick Eades all from \"The Dandy\" and the only original Beano artists that remain in the comic are David Sutherland, Laura Howell and Nigel Parkinson since Barrie Appleby, Barry Glennard, Hunt Emerson and Dave Eastbury all appear to have gone.\n\nA number of strips in the comic have run for a very long time. The top five longest running Beano comic strips are, in descending order, \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"Bash Street Kids\", \"Roger the Dodger\", and then the last holder of the title before \"Dennis\", \"Lord Snooty\".\n\"Dennis the Menace\"'s famous red and black jersey had formed the colours of a few of the \"Beano\" characters' clothes (\"Minnie the Minx\" has the same, although the placement of the stripes is a bit different; \"Ball Boy\"&apos;s was a vertical red and black; \"Roger the Dodger\" has a chessboard design top, and Danny (from the \"Bash Street Kids\") has a similar cap), but they have changed for \"Minnie\" and \"Ball Boy\" (\"Minnie\" at one point had a red and yellow top and \"Ball Boy\"&apos;s strip is now black and blue).\n\nThere are frequent fictional crossovers between \"Beano\" characters, with most of the characters living in the fictional \"Beanotown\". Many of the comic strips in \"The Dandy\" are drawn by the same artists, and crossovers between the two comics also occur occasionally. Quite often, one comic will make a tongue-in-cheek jibe at the other (e.g., a character meeting an elderly lady, and stating that she's \"older than the jokes in \"The Dandy\"\"). In the strips, it is expressed that the two towns are rivals with each other and before \"The Dandy\" did a drastic format change they had an embassy in \"Beanotown\" which many of the town's citizens attempted to overrun, but failed (the embassy had no existence in \"The Beano\"). This rivalry inspired the spin-off computer game \"Beanotown Racing\", in which various characters from both comics could be raced around points in \"Beanotown\", including the Embassy. The game was given a large amount of advance publicity in the comics, with story lines often revolving how the characters each acquired his/her vehicle.\n\nOccasionally there are longer than usual strips for example a strip of sixteen pages rather than the usual two pages. These longer strips include \"The Bash Street Kids\" Adventures written and drawn by Kev F Sutherland which since 2004 have featured parodies of famous comic strip images, including \"Amazing Fantasy\"'s first \"Spider-Man\" cover, Action Comics' first \"Superman\" cover, and most recently the cover of \"X-Men\" No. 100.\n\nDuring the 1980s, \"The Beano\" ran a 'Readers' Request' feature where readers could request for a particular comic strip to feature in the Beano. This led to the return of dropped characters, including \"Little Plum\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\" and \"The McTickles\", but also led to the introduction of new strips such as \"Little Monkey\".\n\nReader polls started to appear in the 1990s, allowing the readers to rate the strips in the comic. These polls have been quite influential, as they indicate which strips the readers like best, and strips that have performed poorly in these polls were usually dropped.\n\nOn a number of occasions, the Beano has allowed its readers to vote for which new strips they want to appear in the comic. This usually consists of three new comic strips being run for a number of weeks and the readers can vote on which strips they prefer and the one that receives the most votes stays in the Beano. Readers have been able to cast their votes via telephone, or more recently via the Beano website.\n\nThe first such vote occurred in 1995 with \"Vic Volcano\" emerging as the winner. In the 1997 competition, two new strips were added permanently, with \"Tim Traveller\" winning and \"Crazy for Daisy\" the runner-up. By the early 2000s, these competitions were named Comic Idol (in reference to \"Pop Idol\"). In the 2004 competition, the margin between winner \"Joe Jitsu\" and runner-up \"Colin the Vet\" was 1%, so both strips were added to the comic.\n\nThe most recent incarnation in 2010 featured three new strips, \"Meebo and Zuky\", \"Home Invasion\", and \"Uh oh Si Co!\". \"Meebo and Zuky\" won, with \"Home Invasion\" finishing as runner-up, though only \"Meebo and Zuky\" were added to the comic. In 2011, the Dandy did a similar competition where readers voted for their favourite out of four strips, entitled \"Strictly Come Laughing\" (a reference to \"Strictly Come Dancing\").\n\nSince 1982 the comic, along with \"The Dandy\", has also run \"Comic Library\" titles. Released monthly, these titles are a feature length (usually about 64-page) adventure, featuring a character from the comic itself. They are available in A5 size only. In 1998, these were replaced by the \"Fun Size Beano\". Fun Size Comics were discontinued in late 2010.\n\nThe comic also ran A4-sized \"Beano Specials\" in 1987 with full coloured pages, which later were replaced by \"Beano Superstars\" which ran for 121 issues from 1992-2002. These were similar to the Comic Library series. Some of the last issues were printed versions of episodes from the 1996-1998 \"Dennis and Gnasher\" animated TV series. A \"Beano Poster Comic\" series was also printed in the early 1990s.\n\nThe Beano Specials returned in 2003, and were now published seasonally. The issues were numbered, and the first one was a Dennis and Friends special, the last a Christmas reprint special. These were replaced by BeanoMAX in early 2007.\n\nOn 15 February 2007, the first issue of a monthly comic entitled BeanoMAX was published. The sister comic features many of the same characters, however the stories in BeanoMAX are written in a longer format meant for 10- to 13-year-olds. The first issue was a Comic Relief special featuring assorted celebrity guests.\n\n\"Plug\" was a comic based on the eponymous character from \"The Bash Street Kids\" that began with issue dated 24 September 1977, and is notable for being the first comic to make use of rotogravure printing. The magazine similar in style to I.P.C's \"Krazy\" which had started the previous year. It contained uncharacteristically outlandish material for D C. Thomson, as well as later including celebrity appearances in the comic.\n\nThe comic revealed Plug's full name to be Percival Proudfoot Plugsley and also gave him a pet monkey by the name of Chumkee. Plug's strip was mostly drawn by Vic Neill but other artists, including Dave Gudgeon drew some later strips. Other strips included \"Antchester United\", \"Violent Elizabeth\", \"Eebagoom\", \"Hugh's Zoo\" and \"D'ye Ken John Squeal and his Hopeless Hounds\".\n\nThe venture was unsuccessful, in part because the comic cost 9p, with the \"Beano\" at the time only costing 4p and most of its rivals priced similarly. It merged with \"The Beezer\" on 24 February 1979.\n\nThe brand new \"Dennis and Gnasher\" was launched separately from \"The Beano\" in September 2009.\n\n\"Dennis and Gnasher\" got their own TV series on CBBC from 7 September 2009 to accompany the comic's new look. This was their second, having also had one in 1996, which ran for two series on CBBC, \"The Children's Channel\", and \"Fox Kids\". It also marked the debut of this Dennis in the US, as \"The Beano\" is not distributed in the US and the title is taken by the \"newspaper comic strip\"- the series aired from 10 October 2010 to 10 December 2013 on what was then known as \"The Hub\" (now renamed \"Discovery Family\").\n\nOn 8 June 2016, it was announced via a press release that the Beano would now form a studio under their name. The studio would be use to bring their characters to life via other forms of media, such as television, film and live performances, to allow their properties to be distributed around the world for all audiences. Soon after the announcement of the studio's formation, news was released about a new television series based upon the companies famous \"Dennis the Menace\" property, which unlike its previous versions, would be done in CGI rather than the classic 2D style drawing. The studio would also revamp the website, \"beano.com\".\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4654", "title": "Bee", "text": "Bee\n\nBees are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants, known for their role in pollination and, in the case of the best-known bee species, the European honey bee, for producing honey and beeswax. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea and are presently considered a clade, called Anthophila. There are nearly 20,000 known species of bees in seven recognized biological families. They are found on every continent except Antarctica, in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants.\n\nSome species including honey bees, bumble bees, and stingless bees live socially in colonies. Bees are adapted for feeding on nectar and pollen, the former primarily as an energy source and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients. Most pollen is used as food for larvae. Bee pollination is important both ecologically and commercially; the decline in wild bees has increased the value of pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees.\n\nBees range in size from tiny stingless bee species whose workers are less than long, to \"Megachile pluto\", the largest species of leafcutter bee, whose females can attain a length of . The most common bees in the Northern Hemisphere are the Halictidae, or sweat bees, but they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies. Vertebrate predators of bees include birds such as bee-eaters; insect predators include beewolves and dragonflies.\n\nHuman beekeeping or apiculture has been practised for millennia, since at least the times of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece. Apart from honey and pollination, honey bees produce beeswax, royal jelly and propolis. Bees have appeared in mythology and folklore, through all phases of art and literature, from ancient times to the present day, though primarily focused in the Northern Hemisphere, where beekeeping is far more common.\n\nThe ancestors of bees were wasps in the family Crabronidae, which were predators of other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. This same evolutionary scenario may have occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the pollen wasps evolved from predatory ancestors. Until recently, the oldest non-compression bee fossil had been found in New Jersey amber, \"Cretotrigona prisca\" of Cretaceous age, a corbiculate bee. A bee fossil from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya), \"Melittosphex burmensis\", is considered \"\"an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees\"\". Derived features of its morphology (apomorphies) place it clearly within the bees, but it retains two unmodified ancestral traits (plesiomorphies) of the legs (two mid-tibial spurs, and a slender hind basitarsus), showing its transitional status. By the Eocene (~45 mya) there was already considerable diversity among eusocial bee lineages.\n\nThe highly eusocial corbiculate Apidae appeared roughly 87 Mya, and the Allodapini (within the Apidae) around 53 Mya.\nThe Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene (~25 Mya) to early Miocene.\nThe Melittidae are known from \"Palaeomacropis eocenicus\" in the Early Eocene.\nThe Megachilidae are known from trace fossils (characteristic leaf cuttings) from the Middle Eocene.\nThe Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, around 34 Mya, of the Florissant shale.\nThe Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species found in amber. The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age.\n\nThe earliest animal-pollinated flowers were shallow, cup-shaped blooms pollinated by insects such as beetles, so the syndrome of insect pollination was well established before the first appearance of bees. The novelty is that bees are specialized as pollination agents, with behavioral and physical modifications that specifically enhance pollination, and are the most efficient pollinating insects. In a process of coevolution, flowers developed floral rewards such as nectar and longer tubes, and bees developed longer tongues to extract the nectar. Bees also developed structures known as scopal hairs and pollen baskets to collect and carry pollen. The location and type differ among and between groups of bees. Most bees have scopal hairs located on their hind legs or on the underside of their abdomens, some bees in the family Apidae possess pollen baskets on their hind legs while very few species lack these entirely and instead collect pollen in their crops. This drove the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, the bees themselves. Bees have not only coevolved with flowers but it is believed that some bees have coevolved with mites. Some bees provide tufts of hairs called acarinaria that appear to provide lodgings for mites; in return, it is believed that the mites eat fungi that attack pollen, so the relationship in this case may be mutualistc.\n\nThis cladogram is based on Debevic \"et al\", 2012, which used molecular phylogeny to demonstrate that the bees (Anthophila) arose from deep within the Crabronidae, which is therefore paraphyletic. The placement of the Heterogynaidae is uncertain. The small subfamily Mellininae was not included in their analysis.\n\nThis cladogram of the bee families is based on Hedtke et al., 2013, which places the former families Dasypodaidae and Meganomiidae as subfamilies inside the Melittidae.\nEnglish names, where available, are given in parentheses.\n\nIt is usually easy to recognise that a particular insect is a bee. They differ from closely related groups such as wasps by having branched or plume-like setae (bristles), combs on the forelimbs for cleaning their antennae, small anatomical differences in the limb structure and the venation of the hind wings, and in females, by having the seventh dorsal abdominal plate divided into two half-plates.\n\nBehaviourally, one of the most obvious characteristics of bees is that they collect pollen to provide provisions for their young, and have the necessary adaptations to do this. However, certain wasp species such as pollen wasps have similar behaviours, and a few species of bee scavenge from carcases to feed their offspring. The world's largest species of bee is thought to be the Indonesian resin bee \"Megachile pluto\", whose females can attain a length of . The smallest species may be dwarf stingless bees in the tribe Meliponini whose workers are less than in length.\nA bee has a pair of large compound eyes which cover much of the surface of the head. Between and above these are three small simple eyes (ocelli) which provide information for the bee on light intensity. The antennae usually have thirteen segments in males and twelve in females and are geniculate, having an elbow joint part way along. They house large numbers of sense organs that can detect touch (mechanoreceptors), smell and taste, and small, hairlike mechanoreceptors that can detect air movement so as to \"hear\" sounds. The mouthparts are adapted for both chewing and sucking by having both a pair of mandibles and a long proboscis for sucking up nectar.\n\nThe thorax has three segments, each with a pair of robust legs, and a pair of membranous wings on the hind two segments. The front legs of corbiculate bees bear combs for cleaning the antennae, and in many species the hind legs bear pollen baskets, flattened sections with incurving hairs to secure the collected pollen. The wings are synchronised in flight and the somewhat smaller hind wings connect to the forewings by a row of hooks along their margin which connect to a groove in the forewing. The abdomen has nine segments, the hindermost three being modified into the sting.\n\nAccording to inclusive fitness theory, organisms can gain fitness not just through increasing their own reproductive output, but also that of close relatives. In evolutionary terms, individuals should help relatives when \"Cost < Relatedness * Benefit\". The requirements for eusociality are more easily fulfilled by haplodiploid species such as bees because of their unusual relatedness structure.\nIn haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs. Because a male is haploid (has only one copy of each gene), his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other. This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton termed \"supersisters\", more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring. Workers often do not reproduce, but they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters (as queens) than they would by having their own offspring (each of which would only have 50% of their genes), assuming they would produce similar numbers. This unusual situation has been proposed as an explanation of the multiple independent evolutions of eusociality (arising at least nine separate times) within the Hymenoptera.\nHowever, some eusocial species such as termites are not haplodiploid. Conversely, all bees are haplodiploid but not all are eusocial, and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males, creating half-sisters that share only 25% of their genes. Haplodiploidy is thus neither necessary nor sufficient for eusociality. But, monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees.\n\nBees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities. Sociality, of several different types, appears to have evolved independently many times within the bees. The most advanced of these are species with eusocial colonies; these are characterised by having cooperative brood care and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive adults, plus overlapping generations. This division of labour creates specialized groups within eusocial societies which are called castes. In some species, groups of cohabiting females may be sisters, and if there is a division of labour within the group, they are considered semisocial. The group is called eusocial if, in addition, the group consists of a mother (the queen) and her daughters (workers). When the castes are purely behavioural alternatives, with no morphological differentiation other than size, the system is considered primitively eusocial, as in many paper wasps; when the castes are morphologically discrete, the system is considered highly eusocial.\n\nThe true honey bees (genus \"Apis\", of which there are seven currently-recognized species) are highly eusocial, and are among the best known of all insects. Their colonies are established by swarms, consisting of a queen and several hundred workers. There are 29 subspecies of one of these species, \"Apis mellifera\", native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of \"A. mellifera\" that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies; they are extremely defensive.\n\nStingless bees are also highly eusocial. They practise mass provisioning, with complex nest architecture and perennial colonies also established via swarming.\n\nMany bumblebees are eusocial, similar to the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets in that the queen initiates a nest on her own rather than by swarming. Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer. Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the pre-existing nest cavity, and colonies rarely last more than a year. In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species worldwide using the IUCN Red List criteria.\n\nThere are many more species of primitively eusocial than highly eusocial bees, but they have been studied less often. Most are in the family Halictidae, or \"sweat bees\". Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average. Queens and workers differ only in size, if at all. Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females hibernate. A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds, such as \"Halictus hesperus\". Some species are eusocial in parts of their range and solitary in others, or have a mix of eusocial and solitary nests in the same population. The orchid bees (Apidae) include some primitively eusocial species with similar biology. Some allodapine bees (Apidae) form primitively eusocial colonies, with progressive provisioning: a larva's food is supplied gradually as it develops, as is the case in honey bees and some bumblebees.\n\nMost other bees, including familiar insects such as carpenter bees, leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself. There is no division of labor so these nests lack queens and \"worker\" bees for these species. Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax.\n\nSolitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood. Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency. Some solitary bees have advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies. A very few species of solitary bees are being cultured for commercial pollination. Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences, namely: carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, polyester bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees and digger bees.\n\nMost solitary bees nest in the ground in a variety of soil textures and conditions while others create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, holes in wood. The female typically creates a compartment (a \"cell\") with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off. A nest may consist of numerous cells. When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males. The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests. The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge. Solitary bees are either stingless or very unlikely to sting (only in self-defense, if ever).\n\nWhile solitary females each make individual nests, some species. such as the European mason bee \"Hoplitis anthocopoides\", and the Dawson's Burrowing bee, \"Amegilla dawsoni,\" are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, and giving the appearance of being social. Large groups of solitary bee nests are called \"aggregations\", to distinguish them from colonies. In some species, multiple females share a common nest, but each makes and provisions her own cells independently. This type of group is called \"communal\" and is not uncommon. The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when there are multiple females using that same entrance on a regular basis.\n\nThe life cycle of a bee, be it a solitary or social species, involves the laying of an egg, the development through several moults of a legless larva, a pupation stage during which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis, followed by the emergence of a winged adult. Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom. The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate. The sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilised; after mating, a female stores the sperm, and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid, fertilised eggs producing female offspring and unfertilised eggs, males. Tropical bees may have several generations in a year and no diapause stage.\nThe egg is generally oblong, slightly curved and tapering at one end. In the case of solitary bees, each one is laid in a cell with a supply of mixed pollen and nectar next to it. This may be rolled into a pellet or placed in a pile and is known as mass provisioning. In social species of bee there is progressive provisioning with the larva being fed regularly while it grows. The nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood, in solitary bees, to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees.\n\nThe larvae are generally whitish grubs, roughly oval and bluntly-pointed at both ends. They have fifteen segments and spiracles in each segment for breathing. They have no legs but are able to move within the confines of the cell, helped by tubercles on their sides. They have short horns on the head, jaws for chewing their food and an appendage on either side of the mouth tipped with a bristle. There is a gland under the mouth that secretes a viscous liquid which solidifies into the silk they use to produce their cocoons. The pupa can be seen through the semi-transparent cocoon and over the course of a few days, the insect undergoes metamorphosis into the form of the adult bee. When ready to emerge, it splits its skin dorsally and climbs out of the exuviae as a winged adult and breaks out of the cell.\n\nIn Antoine Magnan's 1934 book \"Le vol des insectes\", he wrote that he and André Sainte-Laguë had applied the equations of air resistance to insects and found that their flight could not be explained by fixed-wing calculations, but that \"One shouldn't be surprised that the results of the calculations don't square with reality\". This has led to a common misconception that bees \"violate aerodynamic theory\", but in fact it merely confirms that bees do not engage in fixed-wing flight, and that their flight is explained by other mechanics, such as those used by helicopters. In 1996 it was shown that vortices created by many insects' wings helped to provide lift. High-speed cinematography and robotic mock-up of a bee wing showed that lift was generated by \"the unconventional combination of short, choppy wing strokes, a rapid rotation of the wing as it flops over and reverses direction, and a very fast wing-beat frequency\". Wing-beat frequency normally increases as size decreases, but as the bee's wing beat covers such a small arc, it flaps approximately 230 times per second, faster than a fruitfly (200 times per second) which is 80 times smaller.\n\nThe ethologist Karl von Frisch studied navigation in the honey bee. He showed that honey bees communicate by the waggle dance, in which a worker indicates the location of a food source to other workers in the hive. He demonstrated that bees can recognize a desired compass direction in three different ways: by the sun, by the polarization pattern of the blue sky, and by the earth’s magnetic field. He showed that the sun is the preferred or main compass; the other mechanisms are used under cloudy skies or inside a dark beehive. Bees navigate using spatial memory with a \"rich, map-like organization\".\n\nMost bees are polylectic (generalist) meaning they collect pollen from a range of flowering plants, however, some are oligoleges (specialists), in that they only gather pollen from one or a few species or genera of closely related plants. Specialist pollinators also include bee species which gather floral oils instead of pollen, and male orchid bees, which gather aromatic compounds from orchids (one of the few cases where male bees are effective pollinators). Bees are able to sense the presence of desirable flowers through ultraviolet patterning on flowers, floral odors, and even electromagnetic fields. Once landed, a bee then uses nectar quality and pollen taste to determine whether to continue visiting similar flowers.\n\nIn rare cases, a plant species may only be effectively pollinated by a single bee species, and some plants are endangered at least in part because their pollinator is also threatened. There is, however, a pronounced tendency for oligolectic bees to be associated with common, widespread plants which are visited by multiple pollinators. There are some forty oligoleges associated with the creosote bush in the arid parts of the United States southwest, for example.\n\nMany bees are aposematically coloured, typically orange and black, warning of their ability to defend themselves with a powerful sting. As such they are models for Batesian mimicry by non-stinging insects such as bee-flies, robber flies and hoverflies, all of which gain a measure of protection by superficially looking and behaving like bees.\n\nBees are themselves Müllerian mimics of other aposematic insects with the same colour scheme, including wasps, lycid and other beetles, and many butterflies and moths (Lepidoptera) which are themselves distasteful, often through acquiring bitter and poisonous chemicals from their plant food. All the Müllerian mimics, including bees, benefit from the reduced risk of predation that results from their easily recognised warning coloration.\n\nBees are also mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate (pseudocopulation) with the furry lip of the flower, thus pollinating it.\n\nBrood parasites occur in several bee families including the apid subfamily Nomadinae. Females of these bees lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests. They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee. When the cuckoo bee larva hatches it consumes the host larva's pollen ball, and often the host egg also. The Arctic bee species, \"Bombus hyperboreus,\" in particular are an aggressive species that attack and enslave other bees of the same subgenus. However, unlike many other bee brood parasites, they have pollen baskets and often collect pollen.\n\nIn the south of Africa, hives of African honeybees (\"A. mellifera scutellata\") are being destroyed by parasitic workers of the Cape honeybee, \"A. m. capensis\". These lay diploid eggs (\"thelytoky\"), escaping normal worker policing, leading to the colony's destruction; the parasites can then move to other hives.\n\nThe cuckoo bees in the \"Bombus\" subgenus \"Psithyrus\" are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size. This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle \"Emery's rule\". Others parasitize bees in different families, like \"Townsendiella\", a nomadine apid, two species of which are cleptoparasites of the dasypodaid genus \"Hesperapis\", while the other species in the same genus attacks halictid bees.\n\nFour bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular. Most are tropical or subtropical, but there are some which live in arid regions at higher latitudes. These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images. Some have refracting superposition compound eyes: these combine the output of many elements of their compound eyes to provide enough light for each retinal photoreceptor. Their ability to fly by night enables them to avoid many predators, and to exploit flowers that produce nectar only or also at night.\n\nVertebrate predators of bees include bee-eaters, shrikes and flycatchers, which make short sallies to catch insects in flight. Swifts and swallows fly almost continually, catching insects as they go. The honey buzzard attacks bees' nests and eats the larvae. The greater honeyguide interacts with humans by guiding them to the nests of wild bees. The humans break open the nests and take the honey and the bird feeds on the larvae and the wax. Among mammals, predators such as the badger dig up bumblebee nests and eat both the larvae and any stored food.\nSpecialist ambush predators of visitors to flowers include crab spiders, which wait on flowering plants for pollinating insects; predatory bugs, and praying mantises, some of which (the flower mantises of the tropics) wait motionless, aggressive mimics camouflaged as flowers. Beewolves are large wasps that habitually attack bees; the ethologist Niko Tinbergen estimated that a single colony of the beewolf \"Philanthus triangulum\" might kill several thousand honeybees in a day: all the prey he observed were honeybees. Other predatory insects that sometimes catch bees include robber flies and dragonflies.\n\nHoney bees are affected by parasites including acarine and \"Varroa\" mites. However, some bees are believed to have a mutualistic relationship with mites.\n\nThree bee maidens with the power of divination and thus speaking truth are described in Homer's \"Hymn to Hermes\", and the food of the gods is \"identified as honey\"; the bee maidens were originally associated with Apollo, and are probably not correctly identified with the Thriae. Honey, according to a Greek myth, was discovered by a nymph called Melissa (\"Bee\"); and honey was offered to the Greek gods from Mycenean times. Bees were associated, too, with the Delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee.\n\nThe image of a community of honey bees has been used from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, and by political and social theorists such as Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx as a model for human society. In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as \"Telling the bees\".\n\nThe oldest examples of bees in art are rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC.\n\nW. B. Yeats's poem \"The Lake Isle of Innisfree\" (1888) contains the couplet \"Nine bean rows will I have there, a hive for the honey bee, / And live alone in the bee loud glade.\" At the time he was living in Bedford Park in the West of London.\nBeatrix Potter's illustrated book \"The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse\" (1910) features Babbity Bumble and her brood \"(pictured)\".\n\nKit Williams' treasure hunt book \"The Bee on the Comb\" (1984) uses bees and beekeeping as part of its story and puzzle.\n\nSue Monk Kidd's \"The Secret Life of Bees\" (2004), and the 2009 film starring Dakota Fanning, tells the story of a girl who escapes her abusive home and finds her way to live with a family of beekeepers, the Boatwrights.\n\nThe humorous 2007 animated film \"Bee Movie\" used Jerry Seinfeld's first script and was his first work for children; he starred as a bee named Barry B. Benson, alongside Renée Zellweger. Critics found its premise awkward and its delivery tame.\n\nDave Goulson's \"A Sting in the Tale\" (2014) describes his efforts to save bumblebees in Britain, as well as much about their biology.\n\nThe playwright Laline Paull's fantasy \"The Bees\" (2015) tells the tale of a hive bee named Flora 717 from hatching onwards.\n\nHumans have kept honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, for millennia. Beekeepers collect honey, beeswax, propolis, pollen, and royal jelly from hives; bees are also kept to pollinate crops and to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers.\n\nDepictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago; efforts to domesticate them are shown in Egyptian art around 4,500 years ago. Simple hives and smoke were used; jars of honey were found in the tombs of pharaohs such as Tutankhamun. From the 18th century, European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the colony. Among Classical Era authors, beekeeping with the use of smoke is described in the \"History of Animals\" Book 9 (a book not written by Aristotle himself). The account mentions that bees die after stinging; that workers remove corpses from the hive, and guard it; castes including workers and non-working drones, but \"kings\" rather than queens; predators including toads and bee-eaters; and the waggle dance, with the \"irresistible suggestion\" of άpοσειονται (aroseiontai, it waggles) and παρακολουθούσιν (parakolouthousin, they watch).\n\nBeekeeping is described in detail by Virgil in his \"Eclogues\"; it is also mentioned in his \"Aeneid\", and in Pliny's \"Natural History\".\n\nBees play an important role in pollinating flowering plants, and are the major type of pollinator in many ecosystems that contain flowering plants. It is estimated that one third of the human food supply depends on pollination by insects, birds and bats, most of which is accomplished by bees, whether wild or domesticated.\n\nContract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries. From 1972 to 2006, feral honey bees declined dramatically in the US, and they are now almost absent. The number of colonies kept by beekeepers declined slightly, through urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and \"Varroa\" mites, and the closure of beekeeping businesses. In 2006 and 2007 the rate of attrition increased, and was described as colony collapse disorder. In 2010 invertebrate iridescent virus and the fungus \"Nosema ceranae\" were shown to be in every killed colony, and deadly in combination. Winter losses increased to about 1/3. \"Varroa\" mites were thought to be responsible for about half the losses.\n\nApart from colony collapse disorder, losses outside the US have been attributed to causes including pesticide seed dressings, such as Clothianidin, Imidacloprid and Thiamethoxam. From 2013 the European Union restricted some pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further. In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming.\n\nHowever farmers have focused on alternative solutions in order to mitigate these problems. By raising native plants, they provide food for native bee pollinators like \"L. vierecki\" and \"L. leucozonium\", leading to less reliance on honey bee populations.\n\nHoney is a natural product produced by bees and stored for their own use, but its sweetness has always appealed to humans. Before domestication of bees was even attempted, humans were raiding their nests for their honey. Smoke was often used to subdue the bees and such activities are depicted in rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC. Indigenous people in many countries eat insects, including consuming the larvae and pupae of bees, mostly stingless bees. They also gather \"bee brood\" (the larvae, pupae and surrounding cells) for consumption. In the Indonesian dish \"botok tawon\" from Central and East Java, bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut, wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.\n\nHoney bees are used commercially to produce honey. They also produce some substances used as dietary supplements with possible health benefits, pollen, propolis, and royal jelly, though all of these can also cause allergic reactions.\n\nThe painful stings of bees are mostly associated with the poison gland and the Dufour's gland which are abdominal exocrine glands containing various chemicals. In \"Lasioglossum leucozonium\", the Dufour's Gland mostly contains octadecanolide as well as some eicosanolide. There is also evidence of n-triscosane, n-heptacosane, and 22-docosanolide. However, the secretions of these glands could also be used for nest construction.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4660", "title": "Basques", "text": "Basques\n\nThe Basques ( or ; ; ; ) are an indigenous ethnic group characterised by the Basque language, a common culture and shared ancestry to the ancient Vascones and Aquitanians. Basques are indigenous to and primarily inhabit an area traditionally known as the Basque Country (), a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.\n\nThe English word \"Basque\" may be pronounced or and derives from the French \"Basque\" (), which is derived from Gascon \"Basco\" (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish \"Vasco \"(pronounced ). These, in turn, come from Latin \"Vasco\" (pronounced ), plural \"Vascones\" (see History section below). The Latin labial-velar approximant /w/ generally evolved into the bilabials /b/ and /β̞/ in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and Aquitanian, a language related to old Basque and spoken in Gascony in Antiquity (similarly the Latin /w/ evolved into /v/ in French, Italian and other languages).\n\nSeveral coins from the 2nd and 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription \"barscunes\". The place where they were minted is not certain, but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the \"Vascones\". Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on \"bhar-s-\", meaning \"summit\", \"point\" or \"leaves\", according to which \"barscunes\" may have meant \"the mountain people\", \"the tall ones\" or \"the proud ones\", while others have posited a relationship to a proto-Indo-European root \"*bar-\" meaning \"border\", \"frontier\", \"march\".\n\nIn Basque, the people call themselve the \"euskaldunak\", singular \"euskaldun\", formed from \"euskal-\" (i.e. \"Basque (language)\") and \"-dun\" (i.e. \"one who has\"); \"euskaldun\" literally means a Basque speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore, the neologism \"euskotar\", plural \"euskotarrak\", was coined in the 19th century to mean a culturally Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not.\n\nAlfonso Irigoyen posits that the word \"euskara\" is derived from an ancient Basque verb \"enautsi\" \"to say\" (cf. modern Basque \"esan\") and the suffix \"-(k)ara\" (\"way (of doing something)\"). Thus \"euskara\" would literally mean \"way of saying\", \"way of speaking\". One item of evidence in favour of this hypothesis is found in the Spanish book \"Compendio Historial\", written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as \"enusquera\". It may, however, be a writing mistake.\n\nIn the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root \"euzko\" which, he thought, came from \"eguzkiko\" (\"of the sun\", related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of this putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana's neologism \"Euzkadi\" (in the regularized spelling Euskadi) is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish, since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.\n\nSince the Basque language is unrelated to Indo-European, it has long been thought to represent the people or culture that occupied Europe before the spread of Indo-European languages there. A comprehensive analysis of Basque genetic patterns has shown that Basque genetic uniqueness predates the arrival of agriculture in the Iberian Peninsula, about 7,000 years ago.\n\nIt is thought that Basques are a remnant of the early inhabitants of Western Europe, specifically those of the Franco-Cantabrian region. Basque tribes were already mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, the Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).\n\nIn the Early Middle Ages the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined cultural area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Muslim rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north. By the turn of the first millennium, the territory of Vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions, such as Soule and Labourd, while south of the Pyrenees the Castile, Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagorza (later Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars emerged as the main regional entities with Basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries.\n\nThe Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subjected to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by conquering key western territories (1199–1201), leaving the kingdom landlocked. The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512–1524). However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.\n\nNevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839/1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants. On either side of the Pyrenees, the Basques lost their native institutions and laws held during the \"Ancien régime\".\n\nSince then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence. Labourd, Lower Navarre, and Soule were integrated into the French department system (starting 1790), with Basque efforts to establish a region-specific political-administrative entity failing to take off to date.\n\nThe Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and the cantons of Mauléon-Licharre and Tardets-Sorholus in the \"département\" of Pyrénées Atlantiques, France.\n\nThe autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as \"Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa\" or EAE in Basque and as \"Comunidad Autónoma Vasca\" or CAV in Spanish (in English: \"Basque Autonomous Community\" or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of Álava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are \"Araba\", \"Bizkaia\" and \"Gipuzkoa\", and their Spanish names are \"Álava\", \"Vizcaya\" and \"Guipúzcoa\".\n\nThe BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as \"the Basque Country\" (or \"Euskadi\") by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as \"the three provinces\", up to 1978 referred to as \"Provincias Vascongadas\" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as \"the Basque Government\" for \"the government of the BAC\" are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term \"Pays Basque\" (\"Basque Country\"), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country (\"Euskal Herria\" in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or \"French\") Basque Country specifically.\n\nUnder Spain's present constitution, Navarre (\"Nafarroa\" in present-day Basque, \"Navarra\" historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque \"Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa\", in Spanish \"Comunidad Foral de Navarra\" (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. Note that in historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) \"Nafarroa\", while the term \"High Navarre\" (\"Nafarroa Garaia\" in Basque, \"Alta Navarra\" in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.\n\nThere are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (\"Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea\" and \"Zuberoa\" in Basque; \"Labourd, Basse-Navarre\" and \"Soule\" in French), devoid of official status within France's present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives have waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque département, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.\n\nThere are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebastián (in Gipuzkoa) and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in Álava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right under the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco's dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favourable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.\n\nNavarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques' historical capital, is Pamplona (\"Iruñea\" in modern Basque). Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.\n\nAbout a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as \"Iparralde\" (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as \"Hegoalde\" (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are \"Baiona\", \"Angelu\" and \"Miarritze\"). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French. The French Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region. Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.\n\nLarge numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basques abroad were often employed in shepherding and ranching and by maritime fisheries and merchants. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States; Canada, mainly in the provinces of New Brunswick and Quebec), Latin America (in all 23 countries), South Africa, and Australia.\n\nMiguel de Unamuno said: \"There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile.\" Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 45 percent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th centuries were Basque. Over 2.5 million Basque descendants live in Chile; the Basque have been a major influence in the country's cultural and economic development.\n\nBasque place names are to be found, such as New Biscay, now Durango (Mexico), Biscayne Bay, Sacatepequez, Antigua Guatemala and Jalapa, Jalapa (Guatemala), Aguerreberry or Aguereberry Point in the United States, and the \"Nuevo Santander\" region of Mexico. Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango.\n\nIn Mexico most Basques are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, and Coahuila. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.\n\nIn Colombia, Basques settled mainly in Antioquia and the Coffee Axis. It is estimated that nearly 2,500,000 persons from all Antioquia (40% of this department) have Basque ancestry, as well, in the 19th century about 10% of Colombia's total population were Basque descendants. Antioquia has one of the biggest concentrations of Basques descendants around the world. In 1955, Joaquín Ospina said: \"Is there something more similar to the Basque people than the \"\"antioqueños\"\". Also, writer Arturo Escobar Uribe said in his book \"\"Mitos de Antioquia\"\" (Myths of Antioquia) (1950): \"Antioquia, which in its clean ascendance predominates the peninsular farmer of the Basque provinces, inherited the virtues of its ancestors... Despite the predominance of the white race, its extension in the mountains... has projected over Colombia's map the prototype of its race; in Medellín with the industrial paisa, entrepreneur, strong and steady... in its towns, the adventurer, arrogant, world-explorer... Its myths, which are an evidence of their deep credulity and an indubitable proof of their Iberian ancestor, are the sequel of the conqueror's blood which runs through their veins...\". Bambuco, a Colombian folk music, has Basque roots.\n\nThe largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.\n\nTexas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico's north-eastern \"frontera\", including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande River from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic \"hidalgos\", or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.\n\nCalifornia has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city has several Basque restaurants, including Noriega's which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America's Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as \"Californios\".\n\nBasques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.\n\nThe identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or \"Euskara\", spoken today by 25%-30% of the region's population. An idea of the central place of the cultural terms in Basque nationalist politicians is given by the fact that, in Basque, Basques identify themselves by the term \"euskaldun\" and their country as \"Euskal Herria\", literally \"Basque speaker\" and \"Country of the Basque Language\" respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this increasingly vibrant minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not exist in isolation. It is juxtaposed with an equally strong sense of national identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both. . . . I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.\n\nAs a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), and Spanish or French is also the first language of many Basques, all of which maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.\n\nThe Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate. Thus Basque contrasts with other European languages, almost all of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has been spoken continuously \"in situ\", in and around its present territorial location, for longer than other modern European languages, which have all been introduced in historical or prehistorical times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.\n\nHowever, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as \"the oldest language in Europe\" and \"unique among the world's languages\" may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the \"outlandish\" character of Basque. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.\n\nBasques have a close attachment to their home (\"etxe(a)\" 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or \"baserri(a)\". Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old \"baserri\" or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide even those Basque whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: \"Bengoetxea\" \"the house of further down\", \"Goikoetxea\" \"the house above\", \"Landaburu\" \"top of the field\", \"Errekondo\" \"next to the stream\", \"Elizalde\" \"by the church\", \"Mendizabal\" \"wide hill\", \"Usetxe\" \"house of birds\" \"Ibarretxe\" \"house in the valley\", \"Etxeberria\" \"the new house\", and so on.\n\nIn contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the \"fueros,\" favour survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually are inherited by either eldest male or female. As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family. The wealthy Basque families tended to provide for all children in some way while the less affluent had only one asset to provide to one child. However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family. Unlike England with the strict primogeniture where the eldest son inherited everything and did not provide for others. Even though they were provided for in some way siblings had to make their livings by other means. Before the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.\n\nA widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.\n\nBasque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and the excellent produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called \"txoko\" in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.\n\nAt the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically led by large increases in the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades ago the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.\n\nTraditionally Basques have been mostly Roman Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garicoïts. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Fermín Lasuén was born in Vitoria. Lasuén was the successor to Franciscan Padre Junípero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.\n\nA sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. After Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism to become king of France, Protestantism almost disappeared.\n\nBayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512-21.\n\nNowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious.\nRoman Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in Basque Country. In 2012, the proportion of Basques that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 58.6%, while it is one of the most secularized communities of Spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of Basques were atheist.\n\nChristianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are broadly speaking two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in Álava, one in Navarre) were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived \"early\".\n\nPre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name and would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as \"Anbotoko Mari\" who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she travelled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Aloña, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, \"Mari Urraca\" possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name María or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative. At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshipped Christian icons in Basque territories.\n\nMari's consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seem to bear the superior ethical power and also the power of creation and destruction. It's said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at mount Txindoki.\n\nLegends also speak of many and abundant genies, like \"jentilak\" (equivalent to giants), \"lamiak\" (equivalent to nymphs), \"mairuak\" (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), \"iratxoak\" (imps), \"sorginak\" (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. This character is probably an anthropomorphism of the bear. There is a trickster named \"San Martin Txiki\" (\"St Martin the Lesser\").\n\nIt has been shown that some of these stories have entered Basque culture in recent centuries or as part of Roman \"superstition\". It is unclear whether neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving as well as border markers.\n\nThe \"jentilak\" ('Giants'), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of the iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the \"ferrons\", or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as \"Jentilbaratza\".\nHistorically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later European societal norms.\n\nStrabo's account of the north of Spain in his \"Geographica\" (written between approximately 20 BC and 20 AD) makes a mention of \"a sort of woman-rule—not at all a mark of civilization\" (Hadington 1992), a first mention of the—for the period—unusual position of women. \"Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches. Combined with the issue of lingering pagan beliefs, this enraged the leaders of the Spanish Inquisition, perhaps leading to one of the largest witch hunts in the Basque town of Logroño in 1610\".\n\nThis preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:\n...matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly ‘the mistress of the house', hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage.\n\nAlthough the kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the \"juntas\" and \"Juntas Generales\" (such as the \"Juntas Generales de Vizcaya\" or \"Guipúzcoa\") which administered much larger areas. Another example was the fact that in the medieval period most land was owned by the farmers, not the Church or a king.\n\nThe great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: \"pelota\"). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.\n\nThere are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:\n\nThe encierro (bull run) in Pamplona's fiestas \"Sanfermines\" started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.\n\nThere are several clubs within the Basque Country, such as Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alavés, SD Eibar, Athletic Club and CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name — \"osasuna\" means \"health\"). In the 2016-2017 season these five clubs played together in La Liga, the first instance where five Basque clubs have reached that level at the same time. Athletic's recruitment policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players. Real Sociedad also previously employed such a policy.\n\nRugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Heineken Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.\n\nCycling is popular and the Euskaltel-Euskadi professional cycling team, partly sponsored by the Basque Government participated in the UCI World Tour division until 2014. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans were famous for lining the famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.\n\nEach April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside.\n\nWhile there is no independent Basque state, Spain's autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of Álava (Araba), Biscay (Bizkaia) and Gipuzkoa, is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the wide autonomy claim of its population.\n\nNavarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the \"Amejoramiento\", an 'upgrade' of its previous status during dictatorship). It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters). Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.\n\nThe French Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyrénées Atlantiques, centered in Béarn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63.87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.\n\nBoth the Spanish and French governments have, at times, suppressed Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War: cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Roman Catholic Church.\n\nToday, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.\n\nIn Navarre, Basque has been declared an endangered language, since the anti-Basque and conservative government of Navarrese People's Union opposes the symbols of Basque culture, highlighting a Spanish identity for Navarre.\n\nBasque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.\n\nSince its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006.\nSince self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of December 6 of that year. However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spanish (87%). The autonomous regime for the Basque Country was approved in a 1979 referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (\"Amejoramiento del Fuero\": \"improvement of the charter\") was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).\n\nAs with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques, especially in Spain, are strongly nationalist, identifying far more firmly as Basques than as citizens of any existing state. Others do not, feeling as much Basque as Spanish. Many Basques regard the designation as a \"cultural minority\" as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation, the commonly accepted designation for the Basque people up to the rise of the nation-states and the definition imposed by the 1812 Spanish Constitution.\n\nIn modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.\n\nThe strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.\n\nIn 1920, H. G. Wells referred to the Mediterranean race as the \"Iberian race\". He regarded it as a fourth subrace of the Caucasian race, along with the \"Aryan\", \"Semitic\", and \"Hamitic\" subraces. He stated that the main ethnic group that most purely represented the racial stock of the Iberian race was the Basques, and that the Basques were the descendants of the Cro-Magnons. In 1994, in his book \"The History and Geography of Human Genes\", population geneticist L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza stated that \"there is support from many sides\" for the hypothesis that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons.\n\nEven before the development of modern genetics based on DNA sequencing, Basques were already noted for distinctive genetic patterns, such as possessing the highest global apportion of the Rh- blood type (35% phenotypically, 60% genetically). Additionally, the Basque population has virtually no B blood type, nor the related AB type. They have a high rate of O blood group but this is probably due to isolation.\n\nAlthough they are genetically distinctive in some ways, the Basques are still very typically European in terms of their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in terms of some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the western half of Europe, especially along the western fringe of the continent.\n\nThe distinctiveness noted by studies of 'classical' genetic markers (such as blood groups) and the apparently \"pre-Indo-European\" nature of the Basque language has resulted in a popular and long-held view that Basques are \"living fossils\" of the earliest modern humans who colonized Europe. However, studies of the Y-chromosome found that on their direct male lineages, the vast majority of modern Basques have a common ancestry with other Western Europeans, namely a marked predominance of Haplogroup R1b.\n\nInitially Haplogroup R1b was theorised to be that a Palaeolithic marker, introduced when Europe was repopulated after the Last Glacial Maximum, about 25,000 years ago. As such, Basque populations were used as proxy representatives for the \"Palaeolithic component\" in admixture studies that tried to quantify the extent of Neolithic diffusions. Such studies concluded that the main components in the European genomes appear to derive from ancestors whose features were similar to those of modern Basques and people of the Near East (or Western Asia), with average values greater than 35% for both these parental populations, regardless of whether molecular information is taken into account or not. The smallest degree of both Basque and Near Eastern admixture is found in Finland, whereas the highest values are, respectively, 70% \"Basque\" in Spain and roughly 60% \"Near Eastern\" in the Balkans. This theory encountered inconsistencies even prior to most recent chronological re-evaluations. That R1b should be a Palaeolithic marker was an \"ad hoc\" assumption suggested by Semino \"et al.\" (2000) and propagated by subsequent scholars without further analysis. Higher resolution STR analysis of R1b lineages from other western European populations (e.g. Italy or Britain) show that their populations appear to derive from the Basque ones.\n\nMore recent studies instead propose that R1b spread through Europe from southwest Asia in the Neolithic period or later, between 4,000 and 8,000 years ago.\n\nAutosomal genetic studies have confirmed that Basques share:\n\nSeveral ancient DNA samples have been recovered and amplified from Palaeolithic sites in the Basque region. The collection of mtDNA haplogroups sampled there differed significantly compared to their modern frequencies. The authors concluded that there is \"discontinuity\" between ancient and modern Basques.\n\nThus, while Basques harbour some very archaic lineages (such as mtDNA Hg U8a), they are not of \"undiluted Palaeolithic ancestry\", nor are they ancestral to large parts of western Europe. Rather, their genetic distinctiveness is a result of centuries of low population size, genetic drift and endogamy.\n\nIn 2015, a new scientific study of Basque DNA was published which seems to indicate that Basques are descendants of Neolithic farmers who mixed with local hunters before becoming genetically isolated from the rest of Europe for millennia. Mattias Jakobsson from Uppsala University in Sweden analysed genetic material from eight Stone Age human skeletons found in El Portalón Cavern in Atapuerca, northern Spain. These individuals lived between 3,500 and 5,500 years ago, after the transition to farming in southwest Europe. The results show that these early Iberian farmers are the closest ancestors to present-day Basques.\n\nThe official findings were published in \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" of the United States. \"Our results show that the Basques trace their ancestry to early farming groups from Iberia, which contradicts previous views of them being a remnant population that trace their ancestry to Mesolithic hunter-gatherer groups,\" says Prof. Jakobsson.\n\nIt has also been suggested that the high incidence of R1b among Basques can be attributed to an invasion by Indo-European warriors who intermarried with local women, who then raised the resulting children in their culture, not that of their fathers.\n\nAmong the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebastián Elcano (led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus. Don Diego María de Gardoqui y Arriquibar (1735–1798) was Spain's first Ambassador to the United States. Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4661", "title": "Blot", "text": "Blot\n\nBlot may refer to:\n\nSurname:\n\nOther:\n\n"}
{"id": "4662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4662", "title": "Bookkeeping", "text": "Bookkeeping\n\nBookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions, and is part of the process of accounting in business. Transactions include purchases, sales, receipts, and payments by an individual person or an organization/corporation. There are several standard methods of bookkeeping, such as the single-entry bookkeeping system and the double-entry bookkeeping system, but, while they may be thought of as \"real\" bookkeeping, any process that involves the recording of financial transactions is a bookkeeping process.\n\nBookkeeping is usually performed by a bookkeeper. A bookkeeper (or book-keeper) is a person who records the day-to-day financial transactions of a business. He or she is usually responsible for writing the \"daybooks\", which contain records of purchases, sales, receipts, and payments. The bookkeeper is responsible for ensuring that all transactions whether it is cash transaction or credit transaction are recorded in the correct daybook, supplier's ledger, customer ledger, and general ledger; an accountant can then create reports from the information concerning the financial transactions recorded by the bookkeeper.\n\nThe bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage: an accountant may prepare the income statement and balance sheet using the trial balance and ledgers prepared by the bookkeeper.\n\nThe origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity, but recent researches would appear to show that some method of keeping accounts has existed from the remotest times. Babylonian records have been found dating back as far as 2600 B.C., written with a stylus on small slabs of clay. \nThe term \"waste book\" was used in colonial America referring to bookkeeping. The purpose was to document daily transactions including receipts and expenditures. This was recorded in chronological order, and the purpose was for temporary use only. The daily transactions would then be recorded in a daybook or account ledger in order to balance the accounts. The name \"waste book\" comes from the fact that once the waste book's data were transferred to the actual journal, the waste book could be discarded.\n\nThe bookkeeping process primarily records the \"financial effects\" of transactions. The difference between a manual and any electronic accounting system results from the former's latency between the recording of a financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. This delay—absent in electronic accounting systems due to nearly instantaneous posting into relevant accounts—is a basic characteristic of manual systems, thus giving rise to primary books of accounts such as Cash Book, Bank Book, Purchase Book, and Sales Book for recording the immediate effect of a financial transaction.\n\nIn the normal course of business, a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. Sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. Deposit slips are produced when lodgements (deposits) are made to a bank account. Checks (spelled \"cheques\" in the UK and several other countries) are written to pay money out of the account. Bookkeeping first involves recording the details of all of these \"source documents\" into multi-column \"journals\" (also known as \"books of first entry\" or \"daybooks\"). For example, all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal; all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. Each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. In the single entry system, each transaction is recorded only once. Most individuals who balance their check-book each month are using such a system, and most personal-finance software follows this approach.\n\nAfter a certain period, typically a month, each column in each journal is totalled to give a summary for that period. Using the rules of double-entry, these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger, or \"account book\". For example, the entries in the Sales Journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer's account (showing that the customer now owes us money), and a credit entry might be made in the account for \"Sale of class 2 widgets\" (showing that this activity has generated revenue for us). This process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called \"posting\". Once the posting process is complete, accounts kept using the \"T\" format undergo \"balancing\", which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account.\n\nAs a partial check that the posting process was done correctly, a working document called an \"unadjusted trial balance\" is created. In its simplest form, this is a three-column list. Column One contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. If an account has a \"debit\" balance, the balance amount is copied into Column Two (the \"debit column\"); if an account has a \"credit\" balance, the amount is copied into Column Three (the \"credit column\"). The debit column is then totalled, and then the credit column is totalled. The two totals must agree—which is not by chance—because under the double-entry rules, whenever there is a posting, the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. If the two totals do not agree, an error has been made, either in the journals or during the posting process. The error must be located and rectified, and the totals of the debit column and the credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place.\n\nOnce the accounts balance, the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. These adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule: for example, the \"inventory\" account and asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stocktake. At the same time, the \"expense\" account associated with usage of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. Other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. This results in a listing called the \"adjusted trial balance\". It is the accounts in this list, and their corresponding debit or credit balances, that are used to prepare the financial statements.\n\nFinally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance, which may include:\n\nTwo common bookkeeping systems used by businesses and other organizations are the single-entry bookkeeping system and the double-entry bookkeeping system. Single-entry bookkeeping uses only income and expense accounts, recorded primarily in a revenue and expense journal. Single-entry bookkeeping is adequate for many small businesses. In the double-entry accounting system, at least two accounting entries are required to record each financial transaction. These entries may occur in asset, liability, equity, expense, or revenue accounts.\n\nThe primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the \"cash book\", which is similar to a checking account (UK: cheque account, current account) register, but allocates the income and expenses to various income and expense accounts. Separate account records are maintained for petty cash, accounts payable and receivable, and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. These days, single-entry bookkeeping can be done with DIY bookkeeping software to speed up manual calculations.\n\nA \"double-entry bookkeeping system\" is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different nominal ledger accounts.\n\nA \"daybook\" is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions also called a \"book of original entry\". The daybook's details must be entered formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. Daybooks include:\n\n\nA \"petty cash\" book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts; it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. This type of cash book usually uses the imprest system: a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. This money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality, minor stationery, casual postage, and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.\n\n\"Journals\" are recorded in the general journal daybook. A journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. A company can maintain one journal for all transactions, or keep several journals based on similar activity (e.g., sales, cash receipts, revenue, etc.), making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. For every debit journal entry recorded, there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation.\n\nA \"ledger\" is a record of accounts.The ledger is a permanent summary of all amounts entered in supporting Journals which list individual transactions by date. These accounts are recorded separately, showing their beginning/ending balance. A journal lists financial transactions in chronological order, without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be charged in each account. A ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding account for every transaction listed. The ledger also sums up the total of every account, which is transferred into the balance sheet and the income statement. There are three different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping:\n\n\nA chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric, alphabetical, or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. The equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. Possibilities include \"sole trader\", \"partnership\", \"trust\", and \"company\".\n\nComputerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper \"books\" that are used to record the financial transactions of an entity—instead, relational databases take their place, but they still typically enforce the double-entry bookkeeping system and methodology.\n\n"}
{"id": "4664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4664", "title": "Bézier curve", "text": "Bézier curve\n\nA Bézier curve (pronounced ) is a parametric curve frequently used in computer graphics and related fields. Generalizations of Bézier curves to higher dimensions are called Bézier surfaces, of which the Bézier triangle is a special case.\n\nIn vector graphics, Bézier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely. \"Paths\", as they are commonly referred to in image manipulation programs, are combinations of linked Bézier curves. Paths are not bound by the limits of rasterized images and are intuitive to modify.\n\nBézier curves are also used in the time domain, particularly in animation, user interface design and smoothing cursor trajectory in eye gaze controlled interfaces. For example, a Bézier curve can be used to specify the velocity over time of an object such as an icon moving from A to B, rather than simply moving at a fixed number of pixels per step. When animators or interface designers talk about the \"physics\" or \"feel\" of an operation, they may be referring to the particular Bézier curve used to control the velocity over time of the move in question.\n\nThis also applies to robotics where the motion of a welding arm, for example, should be smooth to avoid unnecessary wear.\n\nThe mathematical basis for Bézier curves—the Bernstein polynomial—has been known since 1912, but its applicability to graphics was not realized for another half century.\nBézier curves were widely publicized in 1962 by the French engineer Pierre Bézier, who used them to design automobile bodies at Renault. The study of these curves was however first developed in 1959 by mathematician Paul de Casteljau using de Casteljau's algorithm, a numerically stable method to evaluate Bézier curves at Citroën, another French automaker.\n\nBézier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves. As the curve is completely contained in the convex hull of its control points, the points can be graphically displayed and used to manipulate the curve intuitively. Affine transformations such as translation and rotation can be applied on the curve by applying the respective transform on the control points of the curve.\n\nQuadratic and cubic Bézier curves are most common. Higher degree curves are more computationally expensive to evaluate. When more complex shapes are needed, low order Bézier curves are patched together, producing a composite Bézier curve. A composite Bézier curve is commonly referred to as a \"path\" in vector graphics languages (like PostScript), vector graphics standards (like SVG) and vector graphics programs (like Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw and Inkscape). To guarantee smoothness (\"C\" continuity), the control point at which two curves meet must be on the line between the two control points on either side.\n\nThe simplest method for scan converting (rasterizing) a Bézier curve is to evaluate it at many closely spaced points and scan convert the approximating sequence of line segments. However, this does not guarantee that the rasterized output looks sufficiently smooth, because the points may be spaced too far apart. Conversely it may generate too many points in areas where the curve is close to linear. A common adaptive method is recursive subdivision, in which a curve's control points are checked to see if the curve approximates a straight line to within a small tolerance. If not, the curve is subdivided parametrically into two segments, 0 ≤ \"t\" ≤ 0.5 and 0.5 ≤ \"t\" ≤ 1, and the same procedure is applied recursively to each half. There are also forward differencing methods, but great care must be taken to analyse error propagation.\n\nAnalytical methods where a Bézier is intersected with each scan line involve finding roots of cubic polynomials (for cubic Béziers) and dealing with multiple roots, so they are not often used in practice.\n\nIn animation applications, such as Adobe Flash and Synfig, Bézier curves are used to outline, for example, movement. Users outline the wanted path in Bézier curves, and the application creates the needed frames for the object to move along the path.\n\nFor 3D animation Bézier curves are often used to define 3D paths as well as 2D curves for keyframe interpolation.. Bézier curves are now very frequently used to control the animation easing in CSS and JavaScript.\n\nTrueType fonts use composite Bézier curves composed of quadratic Bézier curves. Modern imaging systems like PostScript, Asymptote, Metafont, and SVG use composite Béziers composed of cubic Bézier curves for drawing curved shapes. OpenType fonts can use either kind, depending on the flavor of the font.\n\nThe internal rendering of all Bézier curves in font or vector graphics renderers will split them recursively up to the point where the curve is flat enough to be drawn as a series of linear or circular segments. The exact splitting algorithm is implementation dependent, only the flatness criteria must be respected to reach the necessary precision and to avoid non-monotonic local changes of curvature. The \"smooth curve\" feature of charts in Microsoft Excel also uses this algorithm.\n\nBecause arcs of circles and ellipses cannot be exactly represented by Bézier curves, they are first approximated by Bézier curves, which are in turn approximated by arcs of circles. This is inefficient as there exists also approximations of all Bézier curves using arcs of circles or ellipses, which can be rendered incrementally with arbitrary precision. Another approach, used by modern hardware graphics adapters with accelerated geometry, can convert exactly all Bézier and conic curves (or surfaces) into NURBS, that can be rendered incrementally without first splitting the curve recursively to reach the necessary flatness condition. This approach also allows preserving the curve definition under all linear or perspective 2D and 3D transforms and projections.\n\nFont engines, like FreeType, draw the font's curves (and lines) on a pixellated surface using a process known as font rasterization.\n\nA Bézier curve is defined by a set of \"control points\" P through P, where \"n\" is called its order (\"n\" = 1 for linear, 2 for quadratic, etc.). The first and last control points are always the end points of the curve; however, the intermediate control points (if any) generally do not lie on the curve. The sums in the following sections are to be understood as affine combinations, the coefficients sum to 1.\n\nGiven distinct points P and P, a linear Bézier curve is simply a straight line between those two points. The curve is given by\n\nand is equivalent to linear interpolation.\n\nA quadratic Bézier curve is the path traced by the function B(\"t\"), given points P, P, and P,\n\nwhich can be interpreted as the linear interpolant of corresponding points on the linear Bézier curves from P to P and from P to P respectively. Rearranging the preceding equation yields:\n\nThe derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n\nfrom which it can be concluded that the tangents to the curve at P and P intersect at P. As \"t\" increases from 0 to 1, the curve departs from P in the direction of P, then bends to arrive at P from the direction of P.\n\nThe second derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n\nFour points P, P, P and P in the plane or in higher-dimensional space define a cubic Bézier curve.\nThe curve starts at P going toward P and arrives at P coming from the direction of P. Usually, it will not pass through P or P; these points are only there to provide directional information. The distance between P and P determines \"how far\" and \"how fast\" the curve moves towards P before turning towards P.\n\nWriting B(\"t\") for the quadratic Bézier curve defined by points P, P, and P, the cubic Bézier curve can be defined as an affine combination of two quadratic Bézier curves:\n\nThe explicit form of the curve is:\n\nFor some choices of P and P the curve may intersect itself, or contain a cusp.\n\nAny series of any 4 distinct points can be converted to a cubic Bézier curve that goes through all 4 points in order.\nGiven the starting and ending point of some cubic Bézier curve, and the points along the curve corresponding to \"t\" = 1/3 and \"t\" = 2/3, the control points for the original Bézier curve can be recovered.\n\nThe derivative of the cubic Bézier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n\nThe second derivative of the Bézier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n\nBézier curves can be defined for any degree \"n.\"\n\nA recursive definition for the Bézier curve of degree \"n\" expresses it as a point-to-point linear combination (linear interpolation) of a pair of corresponding points in two Bézier curves of degree \"n\" − 1.\n\nLet formula_10 denote the Bézier curve determined by any selection of points P, P, ..., P. Then to start,\n\nThis recursion is elucidated in the animations below.\n\nThe formula can be expressed explicitly as follows:\n\nwhere formula_14 are the binomial coefficients.\n\nFor example, for \"n\" = 5:\n\nSome terminology is associated with these parametric curves. We have\n\nwhere the polynomials\n\nare known as Bernstein basis polynomials of degree \"n\".\n\nNote that \"t\" = 1, (1 − \"t\") = 1, and that the binomial coefficient, formula_14, also expressed as formula_19 or formula_20, is:\n\nThe points P are called \"control points\" for the Bézier curve. The polygon formed by connecting the Bézier points with lines, starting with P and finishing with P, is called the \"Bézier polygon\" (or \"control polygon\"). The convex hull of the Bézier polygon contains the Bézier curve.\n\nSometimes it is desirable to express the Bézier curve as a polynomial instead of a sum of less straightforward Bernstein polynomials. Application of the binomial theorem to the definition of the curve followed by some rearrangement will yield:\n\nwhere\n\nThis could be practical if formula_24 can be computed prior to many evaluations of formula_25; however one should use caution as high order curves may lack numeric stability (de Casteljau's algorithm should be used if this occurs). Note that the empty product is 1.\n\n\nA quadratic Bézier curve is also a segment of a parabola. As a parabola is a conic section, some sources refer to quadratic Béziers as \"conic arcs\". With reference to the figure on the right, the important features of the parabola can be derived as follows:\n\n\nThe derivative for a curve of order \"n\" is\n\nThe \"t\" in the function for a linear Bézier curve can be thought of as describing how far B(\"t\") is from P to P. For example, when \"t=0.25\", B(\"t\") is one quarter of the way from point P to P. As \"t\" varies from 0 to 1, B(\"t\") describes a straight line from P to P.\n\nFor quadratic Bézier curves one can construct intermediate points Q and Q such that as \"t\" varies from 0 to 1:\n\nFor higher-order curves one needs correspondingly more intermediate points. For cubic curves one can construct intermediate points Q, Q, and Q that describe linear Bézier curves, and points R & R that describe quadratic Bézier curves:\n\nFor fourth-order curves one can construct intermediate points Q, Q, Q & Q that describe linear Bézier curves, points R, R & R that describe quadratic Bézier curves, and points S & S that describe cubic Bézier curves:\n\nFor fifth-order curves, one can construct similar intermediate points.\n\nThese representations rest on the process used in De Casteljau's algorithm to calculate Bézier curves.\n\nThe curve at a fixed offset from a given Bézier curve, called an offset or parallel curve in mathematics (lying \"parallel\" to the original curve, like the offset between rails in a railroad track), cannot be exactly formed by a Bézier curve (except in some trivial cases). In general, the two-sided offset curve of a cubic Bézier is a 10th-order algebraic curve and more generally for a Bézier of degree \"n\" the two-sided offset curve is an algebraic curve of degree 4\"n\"-2. However, there are heuristic methods that usually give an adequate approximation for practical purposes.\n\nIn the field of vector graphics, painting two symmetrically distanced offset curves is called \"stroking\" (the Bézier curve or in general a path of several Bézier segments). The conversion from offset curves to filled Bézier contours is of practical importance in converting fonts defined in METAFONT, which allows stroking of Bézier curves, to the more widely used PostScript type 1 fonts, which only allow (for efficiency purposes) the mathematically simpler operation of filling a contour defined by (non-self-intersecting) Bézier curves.\n\nA Bézier curve of degree \"n\" can be converted into a Bézier curve of degree \"n\" + 1 \"with the same shape\". This is useful if software supports Bézier curves only of specific degree. For example, systems that can only work with cubic Bézier curves can implicitly work with quadratic curves by using their equivalent cubic representation.\n\nTo do degree elevation, we use the equality formula_30 Each component formula_31 is multiplied by (1 − \"t\") and \"t\", thus increasing a degree by one, without changing the value. Here is the example of increasing degree from 2 to 3.\n\nFor arbitrary \"n\" we use equalities\n\nTherefore:\n\nintroducing arbitrary formula_35 and formula_36.\n\nTherefore, new control points are \n\nThe concept of Degree Elevation can be repeated on a control polygon R to get a sequence of control polygons R,R,R, and so on. After \"r\" degree elevations, the polygon R has the vertices P,P,P...,P given by \n\nIt can also be shown that for the underlying Bézier curve \"B\",\n\nThe rational Bézier curve adds adjustable weights to provide closer approximations to arbitrary shapes. The numerator is a weighted Bernstein-form Bézier curve and the denominator is a weighted sum of Bernstein polynomials. Rational Bézier curves can, among other uses, be used to represent segments of conic sections exactly, including circular arcs.\n\nGiven \"n\" + 1 control points P, the rational Bézier curve can be described by:\nor simply\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4665", "title": "Banach algebra", "text": "Banach algebra\n\nIn mathematics, especially functional analysis, a Banach algebra, named after Stefan Banach, is an associative algebra \"A\" over the real or complex numbers (or over a non-Archimedean complete normed field) that at the same time is also a Banach space, i.e. a normed space and complete in the metric induced by the norm. The norm is required to satisfy\n\nThis ensures that the multiplication operation is continuous.\n\nA Banach algebra is called \"unital\" if it has an identity element for the multiplication whose norm is 1, and \"commutative\" if its multiplication is commutative.\nAny Banach algebra formula_2 (whether it has an identity element or not) can be embedded isometrically into a unital Banach algebra formula_3 so as to form a closed ideal of formula_3. Often one assumes \"a priori\" that the algebra under consideration is unital: for one can develop much of the theory by considering formula_3 and then applying the outcome in the original algebra. However, this is not the case all the time. For example, one cannot define all the trigonometric functions in a Banach algebra without identity.\n\nThe theory of real Banach algebras can be very different from the theory of complex Banach algebras. For example, the spectrum of an element of a nontrivial complex Banach algebra can never be empty, whereas in a real Banach algebra it could be empty for some elements.\n\nBanach algebras can also be defined over fields of p-adic numbers. This is part of p-adic analysis.\n\nThe prototypical example of a Banach algebra is formula_6, the space of (complex-valued) continuous functions on a locally compact (Hausdorff) space that vanish at infinity. formula_6 is unital if and only if \"X\" is compact. The complex conjugation being an involution, formula_6 is in fact a C*-algebra. More generally, every C*-algebra is a Banach algebra.\n\n\nThe algebra of the quaternions formula_9 is not a complex Banach algebra (for any norm on formula_9), for if formula_11 is a complex Banach algebra that is also a division algebra, then formula_12 (Gelfand–Mazur theorem), since if formula_13 is a point in the non-empty spectrum formula_14 of formula_15, formula_16 is not invertible, hence formula_17 since formula_11 is a division algebra, whence formula_19 (which also proves the Gelfand–Mazur theorem).\n\nSeveral elementary functions which are defined via power series may be defined in any unital Banach algebra; examples include the exponential function and the trigonometric functions, and more generally any entire function. (In particular, the exponential map can be used to define abstract index groups.) The formula for the geometric series remains valid in general unital Banach algebras. The binomial theorem also holds for two commuting elements of a Banach algebra.\n\nThe set of invertible elements in any unital Banach algebra is an open set, and the inversion operation on this set is continuous, (and hence homeomorphism) so that it forms a topological group under multiplication.\n\nIf a Banach algebra has unit 1, then 1 cannot be a commutator; i.e., formula_20  for any \"x\", \"y\" ∈ \"A\". This is because \"xy\" and \"yx\" have the same spectrum except possibly \"0\".\n\nThe various algebras of functions given in the examples above have very different properties from standard examples of algebras such as the reals. For example:\n\n\nUnital Banach algebras over the complex field provide a general setting to develop spectral theory. The \"spectrum\" of an element \"x\" ∈ \"A\", denoted by formula_21, consists of all those complex scalars \"λ\" such that \"x\" − \"λ\"1 is not invertible in \"A\". The spectrum of any element \"x\" is a closed subset of the closed disc in C with radius ||\"x\"|| and center 0, and thus is compact. Moreover, the spectrum formula_21 of an element \"x\" is non-empty and satisfies the spectral radius formula:\n\nGiven \"x\" ∈ \"A\", the holomorphic functional calculus allows to define \"ƒ\"(\"x\") ∈ \"A\" for any function \"ƒ\" holomorphic in a neighborhood of formula_24 Furthermore, the spectral mapping theorem holds:\n\nWhen the Banach algebra \"A\" is the algebra L(\"X\") of bounded linear operators on a complex Banach space \"X\"  (e.g., the algebra of square matrices), the notion of the spectrum in \"A\" coincides with the usual one in the operator theory. For \"ƒ\" ∈ \"C\"(\"X\") (with a compact Hausdorff space \"X\"), one sees that:\n\nThe norm of a normal element \"x\" of a C*-algebra coincides with its spectral radius. This generalizes an analogous fact for normal operators.\n\nLet \"A\"  be a complex unital Banach algebra in which every non-zero element \"x\" is invertible (a division algebra). For every \"a\" ∈ \"A\", there is \"λ\" ∈ C such that\n\"a\" − \"λ1 is not invertible (because the spectrum of \"a\" is not empty) hence \"a\" = \"λ1 : this algebra \"A\" is naturally isomorphic to C (the complex case of the Gelfand–Mazur theorem).\n\nLet \"A\"  be a unital \"commutative\" Banach algebra over C. Since \"A\" is then a commutative ring with unit, every non-invertible element of \"A\" belongs to some maximal ideal of \"A\". Since a maximal ideal formula_27 in \"A\" is closed, formula_28 is a Banach algebra that is a field, and it follows from the Gelfand–Mazur theorem that there is a bijection between the set of all maximal ideals of \"A\" and the set Δ(\"A\") of all nonzero homomorphisms from \"A\"  to C. The set Δ(\"A\") is called the \"structure space\" or \"character space\" of \"A\", and its members \"characters.\"\n\nA character χ is a linear functional on \"A\" which is at the same time multiplicative, χ(\"ab\") = χ(\"a\") χ(\"b\"), and satisfies \"χ\"(1) = 1. Every character is automatically continuous from \"A\"  to C, since the kernel of a character is a maximal ideal, which is closed. Moreover, the norm (\"i.e.\", operator norm) of a character is one. Equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence on \"A\" (\"i.e.\", the topology induced by the weak-* topology of \"A\"), the character space, Δ(\"A\"), is a Hausdorff compact space.\n\nFor any \"x\" ∈ \"A\",\n\nwhere formula_30 is the Gelfand representation of \"x\" defined as follows: formula_30 is the continuous function from Δ(\"A\") to C given by formula_32  The spectrum of formula_33 in the formula above, is the spectrum as element of the algebra \"C\"(Δ(\"A\")) of complex continuous functions on the compact space Δ(\"A\"). Explicitly,\n\nAs an algebra, a unital commutative Banach algebra is semisimple (i.e., its Jacobson radical is zero) if and only if its Gelfand representation has trivial kernel. An important example of such an algebra is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, when \"A\" is a commutative unital C*-algebra, the Gelfand representation is then an isometric *-isomorphism between \"A\" and \"C\"(Δ(\"A\")) .\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4667", "title": "Boris Pasternak", "text": "Boris Pasternak\n\nBoris Leonidovich Pasternak (; ) (30 May 1960) was a Soviet Russian poet, novelist, and literary translator. In his native Russian, Pasternak's first book of poems, \"My Sister, Life\" (1917), is one of the most influential collections ever published in the Russian language. Pasternak's translations of stage plays by Goethe, Schiller, Calderón de la Barca and Shakespeare remain very popular with Russian audiences.\n\nOutside Russia, Pasternak is best known as the author of \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1957), a novel which takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the First World War. \"Doctor Zhivago\" was rejected for publication in the USSR. At the instigation of Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was smuggled to Milan and published in 1957 and distributed with the help of the CIA in the rest of Europe. Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1958, an event which both humiliated and enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which forced him to decline the prize, though his descendants were later to accept it in his name in 1988.\n\nPasternak was born in Moscow on 10 February, (Gregorian), 1890 (Julian 29 January) into a wealthy assimilated Ukrainian Jewish family. His father was the Post-Impressionist painter, Leonid Pasternak, professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. His mother was Rosa Kaufman, a concert pianist and the daughter of Odessa industrialist Isadore Kaufman and his wife. Pasternak had a younger brother Alex and sisters Lydia and Josephine. The family claimed to be descended on the paternal line from Isaac Abrabanel, the famous 15th-century Sephardic Jewish treasurer of Portugal.\n\nEarly Education: Gifted, brilliant, and non-conformist Ukrainian boys were sometimes sent, after the age of twelve and with the consent of their parents, to the Holy Dormition Pochayiv Lavra in the western Ukraine. A famous ancient Orthodox monastery under the protection of Russia, where they learned astronomy, mathematics, philosophy, literature, history, logic, music, and rhetoric free from the influence of the Polish Roman Catholic Church. The great medieval library at Pochayiv had survived Polish Roman Catholic hostility. Sometimes willful boys were recommended after a incident of insubordination to some civil as well as religious authority, which were often the same. From 1904 to 1907 Boris Pasternak was the cloister-mate of Peter Minchakievich (1890–1963). Minchakievich came from an Orthodox Ukrainian family and Pasternak came from a Jewish Ukrainian family. Some confusion has arisen as to Pasternak attending a military academy in his boyhood years. The uniforms of their monastery Cadet Corp were only similar to those of The Czar Alexander the Third Military Academy, as Pasternak and Minchakievich never attended any military academy. Most schools used a distinctive military looking uniform particular to them as was the custom of the time in Eastern Europe and Russia. Boyhood friends, they parted in 1908, friendly but with different politics, never to see each other again. Pasternak went to the Moscow Conservatory to study music (later Germany to study philosophy), and Minchakievich went to L'viv University (L'vov, L'wow) to study history and philosophy. The character of Strelnikov in Dr. Zhivago is a composite character, his bad dimension is based upon Leon Trotsky and his good dimension is based upon Peter Minchakievich. Several of Pasternak's characters are composites. After World War One and the Revolution, fighting for the Provisional or Republican government under Kerensky, and then escaping a Communist jail and execution, Minchakievich trekked across Siberia in 1917 and became an American citizen. Pasternak stayed in Russia. \n\nIn a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled,\n\nShortly after his birth, Pasternak's parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement. Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, \"my father illustrated his books, went to see him, revered him, and ...the whole house was imbued with his spirit.\"\n\nIn a 1956 essay, Pasternak recalled his father's feverish work creating illustrations for Tolstoy's novel \"Resurrection\". The novel was serialized in the journal \"Niva\" by the publisher Fyodor Marx, based in St Petersburg. The sketches were drawn from observations in such places as courtrooms, prisons and on trains, in a spirit of realism. To ensure that the sketches met the journal deadline, train conductors were enlisted to personally collect the illustrations. Pasternak wrote,\n\nAccording to Max Hayward, \"In November 1910, when Tolstoy fled from his home and died in the stationmaster's house at Astapovo, Leonid Pasternak was informed by telegram and he went there immediately, taking his son Boris with him, and made a drawing of Tolstoy on his deathbed.\"\n\nRegular visitors to the Pasternak's home also included Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Lev Shestov, Rainer Maria Rilke. Pasternak aspired first to be a musician. Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory. In 1910 he abruptly left for the German University of Marburg, where he studied under Neo-Kantian philosophers Hermann Cohen, Nicolai Hartmann and Paul Natorp.\n\nPasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow family of tea merchants, whose company Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world. Pasternak had tutored her in the final class of high school. He helped her prepare for finals. They met in Marburg during the summer of 1912 when Boris' father, Leonid Pasternak, painted her portrait.\n\nAlthough Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it. He returned to Moscow upon the outbreak of World War I. His first book of poems was published later that year. In the aftermath, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida. However, the Wissotzky family was disturbed by Pasternak's poor prospects and persuaded Ida to refuse him. She turned him down and he told of his love and rejection in the poem \"Marburg\" (1917).\n\n\"I quivered. I flared up, and then was extinguished. \nI shook. I had made a proposal – but late, \nToo late. I was scared, and she had refused me. \nI pity her tears, am more blessed than a saint.\"\n\nAnother failed love affair in 1917 inspired the poems in his first book, \"My Sister, Life\". His early verse cleverly dissimulates his preoccupation with Immanuel Kant's philosophy. Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German-language Romantic poets.\n\nDuring World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodovo-Vilve near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for \"Dr. Zhivago\" many years later. Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917. According to Max Hayward,\n\nWhen it finally was published in 1921, Pasternak's \"My Sister, Life\" revolutionised Russian poetry. It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.\n\nFollowing \"My Sister, Life\", Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle \"Rupture\" (1921). Both Pro-Soviet writers and their White emigre equivalents applauded Pasternak's poetry as pure, unbridled inspiration.\n\nIn the late 1920s, he also participated in the much celebrated tripartite correspondence with Rilke and Tsvetayeva. As the 1920s wore on, however, Pasternak increasingly felt that his colourful style was at odds with a less educated readership. He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905. He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably \"The Childhood of Luvers\" and \"Safe Conduct\".\nIn 1922 Pasternak married Evgeniya Lurye (Евгения Лурье), a student at the Art Institute. The following year they had a son, Evgenii.\n\nEvidence of Pasternak's support of still-revolutionary members of the leadership of the Communist Party as late as 1926 is indicated by his worshipful poem \"In Memory of Reissner\" presumably written upon the shockingly premature death from typhus of legendary Bolshevik leader Larisa Reisner at age 30 in February of that year.\n\nBy 1927, Pasternak's close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the Arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to, \"break off relations,\" with both of them. Although he expressed that it would be deeply painful, Pasternak explained that it could not be prevented. He explained,\n\nBy 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems, aptly titled \"The Second Birth\". Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak's refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist emigres.\n\nIn 1932 Pasternak fell in love with Zinaida Neuhaus, the wife of the Russian pianist Heinrich Neuhaus. They both got divorces and married two years later.\n\nHe continued to change his poetry, simplifying his style and language through the years, as expressed in his next book, \"Early Trains\" (1943).\n\nIn April 1934 Osip Mandelstam recited his \"Stalin Epigram\" to Pasternak. After listening, Pasternak told Mandelstam: \"I didn't hear this, you didn't recite it to me, because, you know, very strange and terrible things are happening now: they've begun to pick people up. I'm afraid the walls have ears and perhaps even these benches on the boulevard here may be able to listen and tell tales. So let's make out that I heard nothing.\"\n\nOn the night of 14 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested at his home based on a warrant signed by NKVD boss Genrikh Yagoda. Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of \"Izvestia\" and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam's behalf.\n\nSoon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak's Moscow apartment. A voice from The Kremlin said, \"Comrade Stalin wishes to speak with you.\" According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb. \"He was totally unprepared for such a conversation. But then he heard \"his\" voice, the voice of Stalin, coming over the line. The Leader addressed him in a rather bluff uncouth fashion, using the familiar \"thou\" form: 'Tell me, what are they saying in your literary circles about the arrest of Mandelstam?'\" Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia. Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam. In an \"eager fumbling manner\" Pasternak explained that he and Mandelstam each had a completely different philosophy about poetry. Stalin finally said, in a mocking tone of voice: \"I see, you just aren't able to stick up for a comrade,\" and put down the receiver.\n\nAccording to Pasternak, during the 1937 show trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants. They demanded Pasternak's signature as well, but he refused to give it. Vladimir Stavski, the chairman of the Union, was terrified that he would be punished for Pasternak's dissent. The leadership of the Union travelled to Pasternak's dacha at Peredelkino and severely threatened the writer, who refused to sign the statement and returned to his dacha. Hearing this, Zinaida Pasternak, who was pregnant, was terribly upset, accusing him of risking the destruction of their family. Pasternak went to bed. He and Zinaida expected to be arrested that evening. They later learned that an NKVD agent was hiding in the bushes outside their window and wrote down every word they said to each other.\n\nSoon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin. He wrote about his family's strong Tolstoyan convictions, which he still held dear. He declared that his own life was at the Leader's disposal. He said that he could not stand as a self-appointed judge of life and death. Pasternak was certain that he would be instantly arrested, but he was not. Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak's name off an execution list during the Great Purge. According to Pasternak, Stalin declared, \"Do not touch this cloud dweller\" (or, in another version, \"Leave that holy fool alone!\")\n\nAlthough Pasternak was never arrested by the Soviet secret police, his close friend Titsian Tabidze fell victim to the Great Purge. In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili as the greatest heartbreaks of his entire life.\n\nIvinskaya wrote, \"I believe that between Stalin and Pasternak there was an incredible, silent duel.\"\n\nPasternak was elated by the outbreak of war between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. When the Luftwaffe began bombing Moscow, Pasternak immediately began to serve as a fire warden on the roof of the writer's building on Lavrushinski Street. According to Ivinskaya, he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it.\n\nIn 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front. He bore up well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury), and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places. He read his poetry and talked extensively with the active and injured troops.\n\nWith the end of the war in 1945, the Soviet people expected to see the end of the devastation of Nazism, and hoped for the end of Stalin's Purges. But, sealed trains began carrying large numbers of prisoners to the Soviet Gulags. Some were Nazi collaborators who had fought under General Andrey Vlasov, but most were ordinary Soviet officers and men. Pasternak watched as ex-POWs were directly transferred from Nazi Germany to Soviet concentration camps. White emigres who had returned due to pledges of amnesty were also sent directly to the Gulag, as were Jews from the Anti-Fascist Committee and other organizations. Many thousands of innocent people were incarcerated in connection with the Leningrad Affair and the so-called Doctor's Plot, while whole ethnic groups were deported to Siberia.\n\nPasternak later said, \"If, in a bad dream, we had seen all the horrors in store for us after the war, we should not have been sorry to see Stalin fall, together with Hitler. Then, an end to the war in favour of our allies, civilized countries with democratic traditions, would have meant a hundred times less suffering for our people than that which Stalin again inflicted on it after his victory.\"\n\nIn October 1946, the twice married Pasternak met Olga Ivinskaya, a 34 year old single mother employed by \"Novy Mir\". Deeply moved by her resemblance to his first love Ida Vysotskaya, Pasternak gave Ivinskaya several volumes of his poetry and literary translations. Although Pasternak never left his wife Zinaida, he started an extramarital relationship with Ivinskaya that would last for the remainder of Pasternak's life. Ivinskaya later recalled, \"He phoned almost every day and, instinctively fearing to meet or talk with him, yet dying of happiness, I would stammer out that I was \"busy today.\" But almost every afternoon, toward the end of working hours, he came in person to the office and often walked with me through the streets, boulevards, and squares all the way home to Potapov Street. 'Shall I make you a present of this square?' he would ask.\"\n\nShe gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below. In the evenings, Pasternak would phone and Volkova would signal by Olga banging on the water pipe which connected their apartments.\n\nWhen they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, Sándor Petőfi. Pasternak gave his lover a book of Petőfi with the inscription, \"Petőfi served as a code in May and June 1947, and my close translations of his lyrics are an expression, adapted to the requirements of the text, of my feelings and thoughts for you and about you. In memory of it all, B.P., 13 May 1948.\"\n\nPasternak later noted on a photograph of himself, \"Petőfi is magnificent with his descriptive lyrics and picture of nature, but you are better still. I worked on him a good deal in 1947 and 1948, when I first came to know you. Thank you for your help. I was translating both of you.\" Ivinskaya would later describe the Petőfi translations as, \"a first declaration of love.\"\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband's infidelity. Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy's sickbed, that he would end his affair with Ivinskaya. Pasternak asked Luisa Popova, a mutual friend, to tell Ivinskaya about his promise. Popova told him that he must do it himself. Soon after, Ivinskaya happened to be ill at Popova's apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.\n\nIvinskaya later recalled,\n\nIn 1948, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya to resign her job at \"Novy Mir\", which was becoming extremely difficult due to their relationship. In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry. In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, \"Our Shop.\"\n\nOn the evening of 6 October 1949, Ivinskaya was arrested at her apartment by the KGB. Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son. Her apartment was ransacked and all items connected with Pasternak were piled up in her presence. Ivinskaya was taken to the Lubyanka Prison and repeatedly interrogated, where she refused to say anything incriminating about Pasternak. At the time, she was pregnant with Pasternak's child and had a miscarriage early in her ten-year sentence in the GULAG.\n\nUpon learning of his mistress' arrest, Pasternak telephoned Liuisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard. She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station. Weeping, Pasternak told her, \"Everything is finished now. They've taken her away from me and I'll never see her again. It's like death, even worse.\"\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya, \"After this, in conversation with people he scarcely knew, he always referred to Stalin as a 'murderer.' Talking with people in the offices of literary periodicals, he often asked: 'When will there be an end to this freedom for lackeys who happily walk over corpses to further their own interests?' He spent a good deal of time with Akhmatova—who in those years was given a very wide berth by most of the people who knew her. He worked intensively on the second part of \"Doctor Zhivago\".\"\n\nIn a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, \"She was put in jail on my account, as the person considered by the secret police to be closest to me, and they hoped that by means of a gruelling interrogation and threats they could extract enough evidence from her to put me on trial. I owe my life, and the fact that they did not touch me in those years, to her heroism and endurance.\"\n\nPasternak's translation of the of \"Faust\" led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of \"Novy Mir\". The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe's \"progressive\" meanings to support \"the reactionary theory of 'pure art'\", as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values. In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which \"Novy Mir\" considered, \"irrational,\" had been translated as Goethe had written them. Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the had not been revoked.\n\nWhen Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Olga Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow. Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief. Pasternak wrote, \"Men who are not free... always idealize their bondage.\"\n\nAfter her release, Pasternak's relationship with Ivinskaya picked up where it had left off. Soon after he confided in her, \"For so long we were ruled over by a madman and a murderer, and now by a fool and a pig. The madman had his occasional flights of fancy, he had an intuitive feeling for certain things, despite his wild obscurantism. Now we are ruled over by mediocrities.\" During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell's \"Animal Farm\" in English. In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, \"vividly reminded\" him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.\n\nAlthough it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was not completed until 1956. Pasternak submitted the novel to \"Новый Мир\" (\"Novy Mir\"), which refused publication due to its rejection of socialist realism. The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the \"progress\" of society. Censors also regarded some passages as anti-Soviet, especially the novel's criticisms of Stalinism, Collectivisation, the Great Purge, and the Gulag.\n\nPasternak's fortunes were soon to change, however. In March 1956, the Italian Communist Party sent a journalist, Sergio d'Angelo, to work in the Soviet Union, and his status as a journalist as well as his membership in the Italian Communist Party allowed him to have access to various aspects of the cultural life in Moscow at the time. A Milan publisher, the communist Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, had also given him a commission to find new works of Soviet literature that would be appealing to Western audiences, and upon learning of \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s existence, d'Angelo travelled immediately to Peredelkino and offered to submit Pasternak's novel to Feltrinelli's company for publication. At first Pasternak was stunned. Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told d'Angelo with a laugh, \"You are hereby invited to watch me face the firing squad.\"\n\nAccording to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk. No Soviet author had attempted to deal with Western publishers since the 1920s, when such behavior led the Soviet State to declare war on Boris Pilnyak and Evgeny Zamyatin. Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli's Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia.\n\nIn a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of \"Doctor Zhivago\" to a Western publishing house. Pasternak, however, refused to change his mind and informed an emissary from Feltrinelli that he was prepared to undergo any sacrifice in order to see \"Doctor Zhivago\" published.\n\nIn 1957, Feltrinelli announced that the novel would be published by his company. Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication. According to Ivinskaya, \"He did not believe that we would ever publish the manuscript here and felt he had no right to withhold a masterpiece from the world – this would be an even greater crime.\" The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.\n\nHelped considerably by the Soviet campaign against the novel (as well as by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency's secret purchase of hundreds of copies of the book as it came off the presses around the world – see \"Nobel Prize\" section below), \"Doctor Zhivago\" became an instant sensation throughout the non-Communist world upon its release in November 1957. In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak's novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people. When informed of this, Pasternak responded, \"No matter. I am above race...\" According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence. At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy. Therefore, he believed that Soviet Jews converting to Christianity was preferable to assimilating into atheism and Stalinism.\n\nThe first English translation of \"Doctor Zhivago\" was hastily produced by Max Hayward and Manya Harari in order to coincide with overwhelming public demand. It was released in August 1958, and remained the only edition available for more than fifty years. Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of \"The New York Times\"' bestseller list.\n\nIvinskaya's daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat. Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was pilloried in the State-owned press. Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, \"I haven't read Pasternak, but I condemn him\".\n\nDuring the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak had regarded Stalin as a, \"giant of the pre-Christian era.\" Therefore, Pasternak's Christian-themed poems were, \"a form of protest.\"\n\nOn 9 September 1958, the \"Literary Gazette\" critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing, \"the decadent religious poetry of Pasternak, which reeks of mothballs from the Symbolist suitcase of 1908–10 manufacture.\" Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life.\n\nIn a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading \"Doctor Zhivago\". She had said, \"Don't forget yourself to the point of believing that it was you who wrote this work. It was the Russian people and their sufferings who created it. Thank God for having expressed it through your pen.\"\n\nAccording to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, \"Rumors that Pasternak was to receive the Nobel Prize started right after the end of World War II. According to the former Nobel Committee head Lars Gyllensten, his nomination was discussed every year from 1946 to 1950, then again in 1957 (it was finally awarded in 1958). Pasternak guessed at this from the growing waves of criticism in USSR. Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: 'According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity…'\"\n\nAccording to journalist Ivan Tolstoi, the British MI6 and the American CIA lent a hand to ensure that \"Doctor Zhivago\" was submitted to the Nobel Committee in the original Russian. According to Tolstoi, this was done so that Pasternak could win the Nobel prize and harm the international credibility of the Soviet Union. He repeats and elaborates upon Feltrinelli's claims that the CIA operatives had photographed a manuscript of the novel and secretly printed a small number of books in the Russian language. More recently, Anna Sergeyeva-Klyatis wrote that the first Russian edition of \"Doctor Zhivago\", which was a pirated version with numerous typographical errors and omissions, was actually initiated by the Central Association of Postwar Émigrées, in response to a growing demand among Russian émigrés.\n\nThe issue of whether or not the CIA had a hand in creating the international controversy that led to Pasternak's winning the Nobel Prize was definitively settled on 11 April 2014 when the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency released \"nearly 100 declassified documents\" confirming that it had, in fact, undertaken a massive propaganda campaign to influence the Nobel Prize committee to consider \"Zhivago\" for the award, starting as early as 12 December 1957: \"\"Dr. Zhivago\" should be published in a maximum number of foreign editions, for maximum free world discussion and acclaim and consideration for such honor as the Nobel prize\" [sic] In order to turn Pasternak's novel into an international bestseller worthy of consideration for the Nobel Prize, the CIA purchased thousands of copies of the novel as they came off the presses throughout Europe. When in the summer of 1958 the Dutch publishing house of Mouton brought out an edition of \"Zhivago\", the CIA secretly arranged to \"obtain first thousand copies of the book off the press and of these send 500 copies to the Brussels Fair\" (i.e. the World Fair held that summer in Brussels, Belgium). In its announcement of the declassification of the \"Zhivago\" documents the CIA states that it also published \"thousands\" of copies of \"Zhivago\" and gave them out to Soviet tourists on holiday in Western Europe and had them smuggled into the Soviet Union: \"After working secretly to publish the Russian-language edition in the Netherlands, the CIA moved quickly to ensure that copies of Doctor Zhivago were available for distribution to Soviet visitors at the 1958 Brussels World's Fair. By the end of the Fair, 355 copies of Doctor Zhivago had been surreptitiously handed out, and eventually thousands more were distributed throughout the Communist bloc. [...] Subsequently, the CIA funded the publication of a miniature, lightweight paperback edition of Doctor Zhivago that could be easily mailed or concealed in a jacket pocket. Distribution of the miniature version began in April 1959.\"\n\nMeanwhile, Pasternak wrote to Renate Schweitzer and his sister, Lydia Pasternak Slater. In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia. Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.\n\nOn 23 October 1958, Boris Pasternak was announced as the winner of the Nobel Prize. The citation credited Pasternak's contribution to Russian lyric poetry and for his role in, \"continuing the great Russian epic tradition.\" On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: \"Infinitely grateful, touched, proud, surprised, overwhelmed.\" That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel. They were further ordered to join a \"spontaneous\" demonstration demanding Pasternak's exile from the Soviet Union. On 26 October, the \"Literary Gazette\" ran an article by David Zaslavski entitled, \"Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed\".\n\nAccording to Solomon Volkov:\n\nFurthermore, Pasternak was informed that, if he traveled to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Medal, he would be refused re-entry to the Soviet Union. As a result, Pasternak sent a second telegram to the Nobel Committee: \"In view of the meaning given the award by the society in which I live, I must renounce this undeserved distinction which has been conferred on me. Please do not take my voluntary renunciation amiss.\" The Swedish Academy announced: \"This refusal, of course, in no way alters the validity of the award. There remains only for the Academy, however, to announce with regret that the presentation of the Prize cannot take place.\"\n\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"I couldn't recognize my father when I saw him that evening. Pale, lifeless face, tired painful eyes, and only speaking about the same thing: 'Now it all doesn’t matter, I declined the Prize.'\"\n\nDespite his decision to decline the award, the Soviet Union of Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State-owned press. Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West. In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev,\n\nIn \"The Oak and the Calf\", Alexander Solzhenitsyn sharply criticized Pasternak, both for declining the Nobel Prize and for sending such a letter to Khrushchev. In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.\n\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"She accused herself bitterly for persuading Pasternak to decline the Prize. After all that had happened, open shadowing, friends turning away, Pasternak's suicidal condition at the time, one can... understand her: the memory of Stalin's camps was too fresh, [and] she tried to protect him.\"\n\nOn 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors. According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal White emigre and a Fascist fifth columnist. Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union. They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to, \"his Capitalist paradise.\" According to Yevgenii Pasternak, however, author Konstantin Paustovsky refused to attend the meeting. Yevgeny Yevtushenko did attend, but walked out in disgust.\n\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, his father would have been exiled had it not been for Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who telephoned Khrushchev and threatened to find a Committee for Pasternak's protection.\n\nIt is possible that the 1958 Nobel Prize prevented Pasternak's imprisonment due to the Soviet State's fear of international protests. Yevgenii Pasternak believes, however, that the resulting persecution fatally weakened his father's health.\n\nMeanwhile, Bill Mauldin produced a political cartoon which won the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning. The cartoon depicts Pasternak and another GULAG inmate, splitting trees in the snow. The caption reads, \"I won the Nobel Prize for literature. What was your crime?\"\n\nPasternak's post-\"Zhivago\" poetry probes the universal questions of love, immortality, and reconciliation with God. Boris Pasternak wrote his last complete book, \"When the Weather Clears\", in 1959.\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over \"Doctor Zhivago\". He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz Słowacki and Pedro Calderón de la Barca. In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discreet support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party's literary apparatus. Ivinskaya describes Liubimov as, \"a shrewd and enlightened person who understood very well that all the mudslinging and commotion over the novel would be forgotten, but that there would always be a Pasternak.\" In a letter to his sisters in Oxford, England, Pasternak claimed to have finished translating one of Calderon's plays in less than a week.\n\nDuring the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing \"The Blind Beauty\", a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II's abolition of serfdom in Russia. In an interview with Olga Carlisle from \"The Paris Review\", Pasternak enthusiastically described the play's plot and characters. He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of \"The Blind Beauty\", he wished to depict \"the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic\". However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.\n\nBoris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960. He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, \"Who will suffer most because of my death? Who will suffer most? Only Oliusha will, and I haven't had time to do anything for her. The worst thing is that she will suffer.\" Pasternak's last words were, \"I can't hear very well. And there's a mist in front of my eyes. But it will go away, won't it? Don't forget to open the window tomorrow.\"\n\nShortly before his death, a priest of the Russian Orthodox Church had given Pasternak the last rites. Later, in the strictest secrecy, a Russian Orthodox funeral liturgy, or Panikhida, was offered in the family's dacha.\n\nDespite only a small notice appearing in the \"Literary Gazette\", handwritten notices carrying the date and time of the funeral were posted throughout the Moscow subway system. As a result, thousands of admirers braved Militia and KGB surveillance to attend Pasternak's funeral in Peredelkino.\n\nBefore Pasternak's civil funeral, Olga Ivinskaya had a conversation with Konstantin Paustovsky. According to Ivinskaya,\n\nThen, in the presence of a large number of foreign journalists, the body of Pasternak was removed to the cemetery. According to Ivinskaya,\n\nTo the horror of the assembled Party officials, however, someone with \"a young and deeply anguished voice\" began reciting Pasternak's banned poem \"Hamlet\".\nAccording to Ivinskaya,\n\nThe final speaker at the graveside service said,\n\nAs the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino's Church of the Transfiguration began to toll. Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak's forehead and the coffin was closed and buried. Pasternak's gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement.\n\nAfter Pasternak's death, Olga Ivinskaya was arrested for the second time, with her daughter, Irina Emelyanova. Both were accused of being Pasternak's link with Western publishers and of dealing in hard currency for \"Doctor Zhivago\". All of Pasternak's letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB. The KGB quietly released them, Irina after one year, in 1962, and Olga in 1964. By this time, Ivinskaya had served four years of an eight-year sentence, in retaliation for her role in \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s publication. In 1978, her memoirs were smuggled abroad and published in Paris. An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title \"A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak\".\n\nIvinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ivinskaya sued for the return of the letters and documents seized by the KGB in 1961. The Russian Supreme Court ultimately ruled against her, stating that, \"there was no proof of ownership,\" and that the, \"papers should remain in the state archive\". Olga Ivinskaya died of cancer on 8 September 1995. A reporter on NTV compared her role to that of other famous muses for Russian poets: \"As Pushkin would not be complete without Anna Kern, and Yesenin would be nothing without Isadora, so Pasternak would not be Pasternak without Olga Ivinskaya, who was his inspiration for \"Doctor Zhivago\".\".\n\nMeanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.\n\nIn 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was serialized in the literary journal \"Novy Mir\".\n\nIn December 1989, Yevgenii Borisovich Pasternak was permitted to travel to Stockholm in order to collect his father's Nobel Medal. At the ceremony, acclaimed cellist and Soviet dissident Mstislav Rostropovich performed a Bach serenade in honor of his deceased countryman.\n\nA 2009 book by Ivan Tolstoi reasserts claims that British and American intelligence officers were involved in ensuring Pasternak's Nobel victory however another Russian researcher disagrees. When Yevgeny Borisovich Pasternak was questioned about this, he responded that his father was completely unaware of the actions of Western intelligence services. Yevgeny further declared that the Nobel Prize caused his father nothing but severe grief and harassment at the hands of the Soviet State.\n\nThe Pasternak family papers are stored at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University. They contain correspondence, drafts of \"Doctor Zhivago\" and other writings, photographs, and other material, of Boris Pasternak and other family members.\n\n\nThe first screen adaptation of \"Doctor Zhivago\", adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965. The film, which toured in the roadshow tradition, starred Omar Sharif, Geraldine Chaplin, and Julie Christie. Concentrating on the love triangle aspects of the novel, the film became a worldwide blockbuster, but was unavailable in Russia until Perestroika.\n\nIn 2002, the novel was adapted as a television miniseries. Directed by Giacomo Campiotti, the serial starred Hans Matheson, Alexandra Maria Lara, Keira Knightley, and Sam Neill.\n\nThe Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Alexander Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is considered more faithful to Pasternak's novel than David Lean's 1965 film.\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya:\n\nFor this reason, Pasternak regularly avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse. According to Ivinskaya, \"It was this sort of thing that moved him to say: 'Who started the idea that I love poetry? I can't stand poetry.'\"\n\nAlso according to Ivinskaya, \"'The way they could write!' he once exclaimed – by 'they' he meant the Russian classics. And immediately afterward, reading or, rather, glancing through some verse in the \"Literary Gazette\": 'Just look how tremendously well they've learned to rhyme! But there's actually nothing there – it would be better to say it in a news bulletin. What has poetry got to do with this?' By 'they' in this case, he meant the poets writing today.\"\n\nReluctant to conform to Socialist Realism, Pasternak turned to translation in order to provide for his family. He soon produced acclaimed translations of Sándor Petőfi, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Rainer Maria Rilke, Paul Verlaine, Taras Shevchenko, and Nikoloz Baratashvili. Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, \"Your collected works will consist of twelve volumes of translations, and only one of your own work.\"\n\nIn a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, \"I am completely opposed to contemporary ideas about translation. The work of Lozinski, Radlova, Marshak, and Chukovski is alien to me, and seems artificial, soulless, and lacking in depth. I share the nineteenth century view of translation as a literary exercise demanding insight of a higher kind than that provided by a merely philological approach.\"\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak believed in not being too literal in his translations, which he felt could confuse the meaning of the text. He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths.\n\nPasternak's translations of William Shakespeare (\"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", \"Othello\", \"King Henry IV\" (Parts I and II), \"Hamlet\", \"Macbeth\", \"King Lear\") remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues. Pasternak's critics, however, accused him of \"pasternakizing\" Shakespeare. In a 1956 essay, Pasternak wrote, \"Translating Shakespeare is a task which takes time and effort. Once it is undertaken, it is best to divide it into sections long enough for the work to not get stale and to complete one section each day. In thus daily progressing through the text, the translator finds himself reliving the circumstances of the author. Day by day, he reproduces his actions and he is drawn into some of his secrets, not in theory, but practically, by experience.\"\n\nAccording to Ivinskaya:\n\nWhile they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya, \"1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones. You may allow yourself to use assonances.\"\n\nLater, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of Vítězslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya:\n\nAccording to Olga Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak. She later recalled:\n\nBoris Pasternak was also a composer, and had a promising musical career as a musician ahead of him, had he chosen to pursue it. He came from a musical family: his mother was a concert pianist and a student of Anton Rubinstein and Theodor Leschetizky, and Pasternak's early impressions were of hearing piano trios in the home. The family had a dacha – country house – close to one occupied by Alexander Scriabin; Sergei Rachmaninoff, Rainer Maria Rilke and Leo Tolstoy were all visitors to the family home. His father Leonid was a painter who produced one of the most important portraits of Scriabin, and Pasternak wrote many years later of witnessing with great excitement the creation of Scriabin's Symphony No. 3, \"The Divine Poem\", in 1903.\n\nPasternak began to compose at the age of 13. The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but – inspired by Scriabin – he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University. Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Alexander Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.\n\nPasternak's early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin. His single-movement \"Piano Sonata\" of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice. Nominally in B minor, it moves freely from key to key with frequent changes of key-signature and a chromatic dissonant style that defies easy analysis. Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Raiki, some 27 miles north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students. (NB. This is not the site of the Pasternak family dacha, now open to the public, in the writers' colony at Peredelkino, which is about 16 miles south-west of the capital.)\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4668", "title": "Binomial coefficient", "text": "Binomial coefficient\n\nIn mathematics, any of the positive integers that occurs as a coefficient in the binomial theorem is a binomial coefficient. Commonly, a binomial coefficient is indexed by a pair of integers and is written formula_1. It is the coefficient of the term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power , which is equal to formula_2. Arranging binomial coefficients into rows for successive values of , and in which ranges from 0 to , gives a triangular array called Pascal's triangle.\n\nThe binomial coefficients occur in many areas of mathematics, especially in the field of combinatorics.\n\nformula_1 is often read aloud as \" choose \", because there are formula_1 ways to choose a subset of size elements, disregarding their order, from a set of elements. The properties of binomial coefficients have led to extending the definition to beyond the common case of integers .\n\nAndreas von Ettingshausen introduced the notation formula_1 in 1826, although the numbers were known centuries earlier (see Pascal's triangle). The earliest known detailed discussion of binomial coefficients is in a tenth-century commentary, by Halayudha, on an ancient Sanskrit text, Pingala's \"Chandaḥśāstra\". In about 1150, the Indian mathematician Bhaskaracharya gave an exposition of binomial coefficients in his book \"Līlāvatī\".\n\nAlternative notations include , , , , , and in all of which the stands for \"combinations\" or \"choices\". Many calculators use variants of the because they can represent it on a single-line display. In this form the binomial coefficients are easily compared to -permutations of, written as , etc.\n\nFor natural numbers (taken to include 0) \"n\" and \"k\", the binomial coefficient formula_1 can be defined as the coefficient of the monomial \"X\" in the expansion of . The same coefficient also occurs (if ) in the binomial formula\n\n(valid for any elements \"x\",\"y\" of a commutative ring),\nwhich explains the name \"binomial coefficient\".\n\nAnother occurrence of this number is in combinatorics, where it gives the number of ways, disregarding order, that \"k\" objects can be chosen from among \"n\" objects; more formally, the number of \"k\"-element subsets (or \"k\"-combinations) of an \"n\"-element set. This number can be seen as equal to the one of the first definition, independently of any of the formulas below to compute it: if in each of the \"n\" factors of the power one temporarily labels the term \"X\" with an index \"i\" (running from 1 to \"n\"), then each subset of \"k\" indices gives after expansion a contribution \"X\", and the coefficient of that monomial in the result will be the number of such subsets. This shows in particular that formula_1 is a natural number for any natural numbers \"n\" and \"k\". There are many other combinatorial interpretations of binomial coefficients (counting problems for which the answer is given by a binomial coefficient expression), for instance the number of words formed of \"n\" bits (digits 0 or 1) whose sum is \"k\" is given by formula_1, while the number of ways to write formula_9 where every \"a\" is a nonnegative integer is given by formula_10. Most of these interpretations are easily seen to be equivalent to counting \"k\"-combinations.\n\nSeveral methods exist to compute the value of formula_1 without actually expanding a binomial power or counting \"k\"-combinations.\n\nOne method uses the recursive, purely additive, formula\n\nwith initial/boundary values\n\nThe formula follows from considering the set {1,2,3,…,\"n\"} and counting separately (a) the \"k\"-element groupings that include a particular set element, say \"\"i\"\", in every group (since \"\"i\"\" is already chosen to fill one spot in every group, we need only choose \"k\" − 1 from the remaining \"n\" − 1) and (b) all the \"k\"-groupings that don't include \"\"i\"\"; this enumerates all the possible \"k\"-combinations of \"n\" elements. It also follows from tracing the contributions to \"X\" in . As there is zero \"X\" or \"X\" in , one might extend the definition beyond the above boundaries to include formula_1 = 0 when either \"k\" > \"n\" or \"k\" < 0. This recursive formula then allows the construction of Pascal's triangle, surrounded by white spaces where the zeros, or the trivial coefficients, would be.\n\nA more efficient method to compute individual binomial coefficients is given by the formula\n\nwhere the numerator of the first fraction formula_16 is expressed as a falling factorial power.\nThis formula is easiest to understand for the combinatorial interpretation of binomial coefficients.\nThe numerator gives the number of ways to select a sequence of \"k\" distinct objects, retaining the order of selection, from a set of \"n\" objects. The denominator counts the number of distinct sequences that define the same \"k\"-combination when order is disregarded.\n\nDue to the symmetry of the binomial coefficient with regard to \"k\" and \"n\"−\"k\", calculation may be optimised by setting the upper limit of the product above to the smaller of \"k\" and \"n\"−\"k\".\n\nFinally, though computationally unsuitable, there is the compact form, often used in proofs and derivations, which makes repeated use of the familiar factorial function:\n\nwhere \"n\"! denotes the factorial of \"n\". This formula follows from the multiplicative formula above by multiplying numerator and denominator by ; as a consequence it involves many factors common to numerator and denominator. It is less practical for explicit computation (in the case that \"k\" is small and \"n\" is large) unless common factors are first cancelled (in particular since factorial values grow very rapidly). The formula does exhibit a symmetry that is less evident from the multiplicative formula (though it is from the definitions)\n\nwhich leads to a more efficient multiplicative computational routine. Using the falling factorial notation,\n\nThe multiplicative formula allows the definition of binomial coefficients to be extended by replacing \"n\" by an arbitrary number \"α\" (negative, real, complex) or even an element of any commutative ring in which all positive integers are invertible:\n\nWith this definition one has a generalization of the binomial formula (with one of the variables set to 1), which justifies still calling the formula_20 binomial coefficients:\n\nThis formula is valid for all complex numbers \"α\" and \"X\" with |\"X\"| < 1. It can also be interpreted as an identity of formal power series in \"X\", where it actually can serve as definition of arbitrary powers of series with constant coefficient equal to 1; the point is that with this definition all identities hold that one expects for exponentiation, notably\n\nIf \"α\" is a nonnegative integer \"n\", then all terms with \"k\" > \"n\" are zero, and the infinite series becomes a finite sum, thereby recovering the binomial formula. However, for other values of \"α\", including negative integers and rational numbers, the series is really infinite.\n\nPascal's rule is the important recurrence relation\n\nwhich can be used to prove by mathematical induction that formula_22 is a natural number for all \"n\" and \"k\", a fact that is not immediately obvious from formula (1).\n\nPascal's rule also gives rise to Pascal's triangle:\n\nRow number \"n\" contains the numbers formula_22 for \"k\" = 0,…,\"n\". It is constructed by starting with ones at the outside and then always adding two adjacent numbers and writing the sum directly underneath. This method allows the quick calculation of binomial coefficients without the need for fractions or multiplications. For instance, by looking at row number 5 of the triangle, one can quickly read off that\nThe differences between elements on other diagonals are the elements in the previous diagonal, as a consequence of the recurrence relation () above.\n\nBinomial coefficients are of importance in combinatorics, because they provide ready formulas for certain frequent counting problems:\n\nFor any nonnegative integer \"k\", the expression formula_30 can be simplified and defined as a polynomial divided by \"k\"!:\n\nthis presents a polynomial in \"t\" with rational coefficients.\n\nAs such, it can be evaluated at any real or complex number \"t\" to define binomial coefficients with such first arguments.\nThese \"generalized binomial coefficients\" appear in Newton's generalized binomial theorem.\n\nFor each \"k\", the polynomial formula_32 can be characterized as the unique degree \"k\" polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") satisfying \"p\"(0) = \"p\"(1) = ... = \"p\"(\"k\" − 1) = 0 and \"p\"(\"k\") = 1.\n\nIts coefficients are expressible in terms of Stirling numbers of the first kind:\nThe derivative of formula_32 can be calculated by logarithmic differentiation:\n\nOver any field of characteristic 0 (that is, any field that contains the rational numbers), each polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") of degree at most \"d\" is uniquely expressible as a linear combination formula_36 of binomial coefficients. The coefficient \"a\" is the \"k\"th difference of the sequence \"p\"(0), \"p\"(1), …, \"p\"(\"k\").\nExplicitly,\n\nEach polynomial formula_32 is integer-valued: it has an integer value at all integer inputs formula_38.\nTherefore, any integer linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials is integer-valued too.\nConversely, () shows that any integer-valued polynomial is an integer linear combination of these binomial coefficient polynomials.\nMore generally, for any subring \"R\" of a characteristic 0 field \"K\", a polynomial in \"K\"[\"t\"] takes values in \"R\" at all integers if and only if it is an \"R\"-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials.\n\nThe integer-valued polynomial 3\"t\"(3\"t\" + 1)/2 can be rewritten as\n\nThe factorial formula facilitates relating nearby binomial coefficients. For instance, if \"k\" is a positive integer and \"n\" is arbitrary, then\n\nand, with a little more work,\nMoreover, the following may be useful:\nFor constant \"n\", we have the following recurrence:\n\nThe formula\n\nis obtained from () by setting \"x\" = 1 and \"y\" = 1. This is equivalent to saying that the elements in one row of Pascal's triangle always add up to two raised to an integer power. A combinatorial interpretation of this fact involving double counting is given by counting subsets of size 0, size 1, size 2, and so on up to size \"n\" of a set \"S\" of \"n\" elements. Since we count the number of subsets of size \"i\" for 0 ≤ \"i\" ≤ \"n\", this sum must be equal to the number of subsets of \"S\", which is known to be 2. That is, () is the statement that the power set of a finite set with \"n\" elements has size 2.\nMore explicitly, consider a bit string with \"n\" digits. This bit string can be used to represent 2 numbers. Now consider all of the bit strings with no ones in them. There is just one, or rather \"n\" choose 0. Next consider the number of bit strings with just a single one in them. There are \"n\", or rather \"n\" choose 1. Continuing this way we can see that the equation above holds.\n\nThe formulas\n\nand\nformula_43\nfollow from () after differentiating with respect to \"x\" (twice in the latter) and then substituting \"x\" = 1.\n\nThe Chu–Vandermonde identity, which holds for any complex-values \"m\" and \"n\" and any non-negative integer \"k\", is\n\nand can be found by examination of the coefficient of formula_44 in the expansion of (1 + \"x\") (1 + \"x\") = (1 + \"x\") using equation (). When \"m\" = 1, equation () reduces to equation (). In the special case \"n\" = 2\"m\", \"k\" = \"m\", using (), the expansion () becomes (as seen in Pascal's triangle at right)\nwhere the term on the right side is a central binomial coefficient.\n\nAnother form of the Chu–Vandermonde identity, which applies for any integers \"j\", \"k\", and \"n\" satisfying 0 ≤ \"j\" ≤ \"k\" ≤ \"n\", is\n\nThe proof is similar, but uses the binomial series expansion () with negative integer exponents.\nWhen \"j\" = \"k\", equation () gives the hockey-stick identity\n\nLet \"F\"(\"n\") denote the \"n\"-th Fibonacci number.\nThen\nThis can be proved by induction using () or by Zeckendorf's representation. A combinatorial proof is given below.\n\nFor integers \"s\" and \"t\" such that formula_47, series multisection gives the following identity for the sum of binomial coefficients:\n\nFor small \"s\", these series have particularly nice forms; for example,\n\nformula_49\n\nformula_50\n\nformula_51\n\nformula_52\n\nformula_53\n\nformula_54\n\nformula_55\n\nAlthough there is no closed formula for partial sums\n\nof binomial coefficients, one can again use () and induction to show that for \"k\" = 0, ..., \"n\" − 1,\n\nwith special case\n\nfor \"n\" > 0. This latter result is also a special case of the result from the theory of finite differences that for any polynomial \"P\"(\"x\") of degree less than \"n\",\nDifferentiating () \"k\" times and setting \"x\" = −1 yields this for\nformula_60,\nwhen 0 ≤ \"k\" < \"n\",\nand the general case follows by taking linear combinations of these.\n\nWhen \"P\"(\"x\") is of degree less than or equal to \"n\",\n\nwhere formula_61 is the coefficient of degree \"n\" in \"P\"(\"x\").\n\nMore generally for (),\nwhere \"m\" and \"d\" are complex numbers. This follows immediately applying () to the polynomial \"Q(x):=P(m + dx)\" instead of \"P(x)\", and observing that \"Q(x)\" has still degree less than or equal to \"n\", and that its coefficient of degree \"n\" is \"da\".\n\nThe series\nformula_63 is convergent for \"k\" ≥ 2. This formula is used in the analysis of the German tank problem. It follows from formula_64\nwhich is proved by induction on \"M\".\n\nMany identities involving binomial coefficients can be proved by combinatorial means. For example, the following identity for nonnegative integers formula_65 (which reduces to () when \"q\" = 1):\n\ncan be given a double counting proof, as follows. The left side counts the number of ways of selecting a subset of [\"n\"] = {1, 2, …, n} with at least \"q\" elements, and marking \"q\" elements among those selected. The right side counts the same parameter, because there are formula_67 ways of choosing a set of \"q\" marks and they occur in all subsets that additionally contain some subset of the remaining elements, of which there are formula_68\n\nIn the Pascal's rule\nboth sides count the number of \"k\"-element subsets of [\"n\"]: the two terms on the right side group them into those that contain element \"n\" and those that do not.\n\nThe identity () also has a combinatorial proof. The identity reads\n\nSuppose you have formula_71 empty squares arranged in a row and you want to mark (select) \"n\" of them. There are formula_72 ways to do this. On the other hand, you may select your \"n\" squares by selecting \"k\" squares from among the first \"n\" and formula_73 squares from the remaining \"n\" squares; any \"k\" from 0 to \"n\" will work. This gives\nNow apply () to get the result.\n\nThe identity \n\nhas the following combinatorial proof. The number formula_76 denotes the number of paths in a two-dimensional lattice from formula_77 to formula_78 using steps formula_79 and formula_80. This is easy to see: there are formula_81 steps in total and one may choose the formula_82 formula_80 steps. Now, replace each formula_80 step by a formula_85 step; note that there are exactly formula_82. Then one arrives at point formula_87 using steps formula_79 and formula_85. Doing this for all formula_82 between formula_91 and formula_92 gives all paths from formula_77 to formula_87 using steps formula_79 and formula_85. Clearly, there are exactly formula_97 such paths.\n\nThe number of \"k\"-combinations for all \"k\", formula_98, is the sum of the \"n\"th row (counting from 0) of the binomial coefficients. These combinations are enumerated by the 1 digits of the set of base 2 numbers counting from 0 to formula_99, where each digit position is an item from the set of \"n\".\n\nDixon's identity is\n\nor, more generally,\n\nwhere \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are non-negative integers.\n\nCertain trigonometric integrals have values expressible in terms of\nbinomial coefficients:\n\nFor formula_102\n\nThese can be proved by using Euler's formula to convert trigonometric functions to complex exponentials, expanding using the binomial theorem, and integrating term by term.\n\nFor a fixed \"n\", the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_106 is:\n\nFor a fixed \"k\", the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_108 is:\n\nThe bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:\n\nAnother bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients, which is symmetric, is:\n\nA symmetric exponential bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:\n\nIn 1852, Kummer proved that if \"m\" and \"n\" are nonnegative integers and \"p\" is a prime number, then the largest power of \"p\" dividing formula_113 equals \"p\", where \"c\" is the number of carries when \"m\" and \"n\" are added in base \"p\".\nEquivalently, the exponent of a prime \"p\" in formula_24\nequals the number of nonnegative integers \"j\" such that the fractional part of \"k\"/\"p\" is greater than the fractional part of \"n\"/\"p\". It can be deduced from this that formula_24 is divisible by \"n\"/gcd(\"n\",\"k\"). In particular therefore it follows that \"p\" divides formula_116 for all positive integers \"r\" and \"s\" such that \"s\" < \"p\". However this is not true of higher powers of \"p\": for example 9 does not divide formula_117.\n\nA somewhat surprising result by David Singmaster (1974) is that any integer divides almost all binomial coefficients. More precisely, fix an integer \"d\" and let \"f\"(\"N\") denote the number of binomial coefficients formula_24 with \"n\" < \"N\" such that \"d\" divides formula_24. Then\nSince the number of binomial coefficients formula_24 with \"n\" < \"N\" is \"N\"(\"N\" + 1) / 2, this implies that the density of binomial coefficients divisible by \"d\" goes to 1.\n\nAnother fact:\nAn integer \"n\" ≥ 2 is prime if and only if\nall the intermediate binomial coefficients\nare divisible by \"n\".\n\nProof:\nWhen \"p\" is prime, \"p\" divides\nbecause formula_124 is a natural number and \"p\" divides the numerator but not the denominator.\nWhen \"n\" is composite, let \"p\" be the smallest prime factor of \"n\" and let \"k\" = n/p. Then 0 < \"p\" < \"n\" and\notherwise the numerator \"k\"(\"n\" − 1)(\"n\" − 2)×...×(\"n\" − \"p\" + 1) has to be divisible by \"n\" = \"k\"×\"p\", this can only be the case when (\"n\" − 1)(\"n\" − 2)×...×(\"n\" − \"p\" + 1) is divisible by \"p\". But \"n\" is divisible by \"p\", so \"p\" does not divide \"n\" − 1, \"n\" − 2, ..., \"n\" − \"p\" + 1 and because \"p\" is prime, we know that \"p\" does not divide (\"n\" − 1)(\"n\" − 2)×...×(\"n\" − \"p\" + 1) and so the numerator cannot be divisible by \"n\".\n\nThe following bounds for formula_24 hold for all values of \"n\" and \"k\" such that for 1 ≤ \"k\" ≤ \"n\":\n\nStirling's approximation yields the bounds:\n\nand the approximation\n\nFor both formula_132 and formula_82 much larger than 1, Stirling's approximation also yields the following asymptotic approximation:\n\nwhere formula_135 is the binary entropy of formula_136.\nMore precisely, for all integers formula_137 with formula_138, we can estimate the sum of the first formula_139 binomial coefficients as follows:\n\nWhen formula_132 is large and formula_82 is much smaller than formula_132, one can also write\n\nand therefore\n\nIf more precision is desired, one can approximate formula_146 with an integral, obtaining\n\nFor formula_148 and formula_149, formula_150, and these approximations yield 12.312 and 12.133 respectively.\n\nThe infinite product formula (cf. Gamma function, alternative definition)\nyields the asymptotic formulas\nas formula_153.\n\nThis asymptotic behaviour is contained in the approximation\nas well. (Here formula_155 is the \"k\"-th harmonic number and formula_156 is the Euler–Mascheroni constant.)\n\nFurther, the asymptotic formula\nhold true, whenever formula_158 and formula_159 for some complex number formula_160.\n\nA simple and rough upper bound for the sum of binomial coefficients can be obtained using the binomial theorem:\n\nIf \"n\" is large and \"k\" is linear in \"n\", various precise asymptotic estimates exist for the binomial coefficient formula_162. For example, if formula_163 then\nwhere \"d\" = \"n\" − 2\"k\".\n\nBinomial coefficients can be generalized to multinomial coefficients defined to be the number:\nwhere\n\nWhile the binomial coefficients represent the coefficients of (\"x\"+\"y\"), the multinomial coefficients\nrepresent the coefficients of the polynomial\nThe case \"r\" = 2 gives binomial coefficients:\n\nThe combinatorial interpretation of multinomial coefficients is distribution of \"n\" distinguishable elements over \"r\" (distinguishable) containers, each containing exactly \"k\" elements, where \"i\" is the index of the container.\n\nMultinomial coefficients have many properties similar to those of binomial coefficients, for example the recurrence relation:\nand symmetry:\nwhere formula_171 is a permutation of (1,2...,\"r\").\n\nUsing Stirling numbers of the first kind the series expansion around any arbitrarily chosen point formula_172 is\n\nThe definition of the binomial coefficients can be extended to the case where formula_132 is real and formula_82 is integer.\n\nIn particular, the following identity holds for any non-negative integer formula_82 :\n\nThis shows up when expanding formula_178 into a power series using the Newton binomial series :\n\nOne can express the product of binomial coefficients as a linear combination of binomial coefficients:\n\nwhere the connection coefficients are multinomial coefficients. In terms of labelled combinatorial objects, the connection coefficients represent the number of ways to assign \"m+n-k\" labels to a pair of labelled combinatorial objects—of weight \"m\" and \"n\" respectively—that have had their first \"k\" labels identified, or glued together to get a new labelled combinatorial object of weight \"m+n-k\". (That is, to separate the labels into three portions to apply to the glued part, the unglued part of the first object, and the unglued part of the second object.) In this regard, binomial coefficients are to exponential generating series what falling factorials are to ordinary generating series.\n\nThe partial fraction decomposition of the reciprocal is given by\n\nNewton's binomial series, named after Sir Isaac Newton, is a generalization of the binomial theorem to infinite series:\n\nThe identity can be obtained by showing that both sides satisfy the differential equation (1 + \"z\") \"f\"'(\"z\") = α \"f\"(\"z\").\n\nThe radius of convergence of this series is 1. An alternative expression is\n\nwhere the identity\n\nis applied.\n\nBinomial coefficients count subsets of prescribed size from a given set. A related combinatorial problem is to count multisets of prescribed size with elements drawn from a given set, that is, to count the number of ways to select a certain number of elements from a given set with the possibility of selecting the same element repeatedly. The resulting numbers are called \"multiset coefficients\"; the number of ways to \"multichoose\" (i.e., choose with replacement) \"k\" items from an \"n\" element set is denoted formula_186.\n\nTo avoid ambiguity and confusion with \"n\"'s main denotation in this article,<br> let \"f\" = \"n\" = \"r\" + (\"k\" – 1) and \"r\" = \"f\" – (\"k\" – 1).\n\nMultiset coefficients may be expressed in terms of binomial coefficients by the rule\nOne possible alternative characterization of this identity is as follows:\nWe may define the falling factorial as\nand the corresponding rising factorial as\nso, for example,\nThen the binomial coefficients may be written as \nwhile the corresponding multiset coefficient is defined by replacing the falling with the rising factorial:\n\nFor any \"n\",\n\nIn particular, binomial coefficients evaluated at negative integers are given by signed multiset coefficients. In the special case formula_194, this reduces to formula_195\n\nFor example, if \"n\" = -4 and \"k\" = 7, then \"r\" = 4 and \"f\" = 10:\n\nThe binomial coefficient is generalized to two real or complex valued arguments using the gamma function or beta function via\nThis definition inherits these following additional properties from formula_198:\nmoreover,\n\nThe resulting function has been little-studied, apparently first being graphed in . Notably, many binomial identities fail: formula_201 but formula_201 for \"n\" positive (so formula_203 negative). The behavior is quite complex, and markedly different in various octants (that is, with respect to the \"x\" and \"y\" axes and the line formula_204), with the behavior for negative \"x\" having singularities at negative integer values and a checkerboard of positive and negative regions:\n\nThe binomial coefficient has a q-analog generalization known as the Gaussian binomial coefficient.\n\nThe definition of the binomial coefficient can be generalized to infinite cardinals by defining:\n\nwhere A is some set with cardinality formula_213. One can show that the generalized binomial coefficient is well-defined, in the sense that no matter what set we choose to represent the cardinal number formula_213, formula_215 will remain the same. For finite cardinals, this definition coincides with the standard definition of the binomial coefficient.\n\nAssuming the Axiom of Choice, one can show that formula_216 for any infinite cardinal formula_213.\n\nThe notation formula_218 is convenient in handwriting but inconvenient for typewriters and computer terminals. Many programming languages do not offer a standard subroutine for computing the binomial coefficient, but for example both the APL programming language and the (related) J programming language use the exclamation mark: k ! n .\n\nNaive implementations of the factorial formula, such as the following snippet in Python:\n\nfrom math import factorial\ndef binomialCoefficient(n, k):\nare very slow and are useless for calculating factorials of very high numbers (in languages such as C or Java they suffer from overflow errors because of this reason). A direct implementation of the multiplicative formula works well:\ndef binomialCoefficient(n, k):\n\nPascal's rule provides a recursive definition which can also be implemented in Python, although it is less efficient:\n\ndef binomialCoefficient(n, k):\nThe example mentioned above can be also written in functional style. The following Scheme example uses the recursive definition\nRational arithmetic can be easily avoided using integer division\nThe following implementation uses all these ideas\n\n (define (binomial-iter n k i prev)\n (if (< k (- n k))\nWhen computing formula_221 in a language with fixed-length integers, the multiplication by formula_81 may overflow even when the result would fit. The overflow can be avoided by dividing first and fixing the result using the remainder:\n\nImplementation in the C language:\nunsigned binomial(unsigned n, unsigned k) {\n\nAnother way to compute the binomial coefficient when using large numbers is to recognize that\n\nwhere formula_225 formula_226 denotes the natural logarithm of the gamma function at formula_132. It is a special function that is easily computed and is standard in some programming languages such as using \"log_gamma\" in Maxima, \"LogGamma\" in Mathematica, \"gammaln\" in MATLAB and Python's SciPy module, \"lngamma\" in PARI/GP or \"lgamma\" in R and Julia. Roundoff error may cause the returned value to not be an integer.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4669", "title": "Bill Holbrook", "text": "Bill Holbrook\n\nBill Holbrook (born 1958) is an American cartoonist and webcomic writer and artist, best known for his syndicated comic strip \"On the Fastrack\".\n\nBorn in Los Angeles, Holbrook grew up in Huntsville, Alabama, and began drawing at an early age. While majoring in illustration and visual design at Auburn University, Holbrook served as art director of the student newspaper, doing editorial cartoons and a weekly comic strip. At the same time, his work was being published in the \"Huntsville Times\" and the \"Monroe Journal\". After graduation in 1980, he joined the \"Atlanta Constitution\" as an editorial staff artist.\n\nDuring a 1982 visit to relatives on the West Coast, Holbrook met \"Peanuts\" creator, Charles Schulz. Following his advice and encouragement, Holbrook created a strip in the fall of that year about a college graduate working in a rundown diner. It did not stir syndicate interest, but what he learned on the strip helped him when he created \"On the Fastrack\".\n\nEleven days before \"On the Fastrack\" made its syndicated debut (March 19, 1984), Holbrook met Teri Peitso on a blind date. They were married on Pearl Harbor Day, 1985. They have two daughters, Chandler and Haviland. Peitso-Holbrook's novels have been nominated for both Edgar Awards and Agatha Awards. She is currently an assistant professor in literacy education at Georgia State University. The family lives in the Atlanta area.\n\nIn October 1989, Holbrook began his second strip, \"Safe Havens\", and his third strip, \"Kevin and Kell\" was launched in September 1995.\n\nEvery week Holbrook writes the story line for the next three weeks for one of his strips and draws the next three weeks' worth of strips for another. In 2010, characters from \"On the Fastrack\" and \"Safe Havens\" began appearing in both strips.\n\n"}
{"id": "4670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4670", "title": "Bruce Campbell", "text": "Bruce Campbell\n\nBruce Lorne Campbell (born June 22, 1958) is an American actor, producer, writer, comedian and director. One of his best-known roles is portraying Ash Williams in Sam Raimi's \"Evil Dead\" franchise, from the 1978 short film \"Within the Woods\" to the ongoing TV series \"Ash vs Evil Dead\". He has starred in many low-budget cult films such as \"Crimewave\" (1985), \"Maniac Cop\" (1988), \"\" (1989), and \"Bubba Ho-Tep\" (2002).\n\nIn television, Campbell had lead roles in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" (1993–94) and \"Jack of all Trades\" (2000), starred as Autolycus (the King of Thieves) in \"\" and \"\" (1995–99), Sam Axe on the USA Network series \"Burn Notice\" (2007–13), and reprised his role as Ash Williams on the Starz series \"Ash vs. Evil Dead\".\n\nCampbell started his directing career with \"Fanalysis\" (2002) and \"A Community Speaks\" (2004), and then with the horror comedy feature films \"Man with the Screaming Brain\" (2005) and \"My Name Is Bruce\" (2007), the latter being a spoof of his career. He can also be seen as the role of the father in \"The Escort\" (2015).\n\nCampbell was born in Royal Oak, the son of Joanne Louise (née Pickens), a homemaker, and Charles Newton Campbell, an amateur actor and traveling billboard inspector. He has an older brother, Don, and an older half-brother, Michael Rendine. He is of Scottish descent.\n\nCampbell's first wife was Cristine Deveau, whom he married in 1983. They had two children, Rebecca and Andy, before their divorce in 1989. Campbell currently lives in Jacksonville, Oregon, with his second wife, costume designer Ida Gearon, whom he met on the set of the movie \"Mindwarp\".\n\nCampbell is also an ordained minister and has officiated weddings for couples.\n\nCampbell began acting as a teenager and soon began making short Super 8 movies with friends. After meeting Sam Raimi in Wylie E. Groves High School, the two became very good friends and started making movies together. Campbell would go on to attend Western Michigan University while he continued to work on his acting career. Campbell and Raimi collaborated on a 30-minute Super 8 version of the first \"Evil Dead\" film, titled \"Within the Woods\", which was initially used to attract investors.\n\nA few years later, Campbell and Raimi got together with family and friends and began work on \"The Evil Dead\". Campbell starred and worked behind the camera, receiving a \"co-executive producer\" credit. Raimi wrote, directed and edited, while fellow Michigander Rob Tapert was producer. Following an endorsement by horror writer Stephen King, the film slowly began to receive distribution. Four years following its original release, it became the number one movie in the UK. It then received distribution in the U.S., spawning two sequels: \"Evil Dead II\" and \"Army of Darkness\".\n\nHe was also drawn in the Marvel Zombie comics as his character, Ash Williams. He is featured in five comics, all in the series \"Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness\". In the comics he fights alongside the Marvel heroes against the heroes and people who have turned into zombies (deadites) while in search of the Necronomicon (Book of the Names of the Dead).\n\nHe has appeared in many of Raimi's films outside of the \"Evil Dead\" series, notably having cameos in the director's \"Spider-Man\" film series. Campbell also joined the cast in Raimi's \"Darkman\" and \"The Quick and the Dead\", though having no actual screen time in the latter film's theatrical cut.\n\nCampbell often takes on quirky roles, such as Elvis Presley in the film \"Bubba Ho-Tep\". Along with \"Bubba Ho-Tep\", he played a supporting role in \"Maniac Cop\" and \"Maniac Cop 2\", and spoofed his career in the self-directed \"My Name is Bruce.\"\n\nOther mainstream films for Campbell include supporting or featured roles in the Coen Brothers film \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", the Michael Crichton adaptation \"Congo\", the film version of \"McHale's Navy\", \"Escape From L.A.\" ( the sequel to John Carpenter's \"Escape From New York\"), the Jim Carrey drama \"The Majestic\" and the 2005 Disney film \"Sky High\".\nCampbell had a starring voice role in the hit 2009 animated adaptation of the children's book \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\", and a supporting voice role in Pixar's \"Cars 2\".\n\nIn January 2010, he stated in an interview that his new film project is called \"Bruce vs. Frankenstein\". The film is directed and produced by his friend Mike Richardson.\n\nCampbell produced the remake of \"The Evil Dead\", along with Sam Raimi and Rob Tapert. Campbell made an appearance that may allude to his signature character, Ash, with the expectation he would reprise that role in \"Army of Darkness 2\". In a later interview with TV personality Erin Ashley Darling, Campbell announced that \"Army of Darkness 2\" is not happening, saying \"It's all internet B.S. There's no reality whatsoever. These random comments slip out of either my mouth, or Sam Raimi's mouth, next thing you know, we're making a sequel.\"\n\nOutside of film, Campbell has appeared in a number of television series. He starred in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" a boisterous science fiction comedy western created by Jeffrey Boam and Carlton Cuse that ran for one season. He played a lawyer turned bounty hunter who was trying to hunt down John Bly, the man who killed his father. He starred in the television series \"Jack of All Trades\", set on a fictional island, occupied by the French in 1801. Campbell was also credited as co-executive producer, among others. The show was directed by Eric Gruendemann, and was produced by various people, including Sam Raimi. The show aired for two seasons, from 2000 to 2001. He had a recurring role as \"Bill Church Jr.\" based upon the character of Morgan Edge from the Superman comics on \"\".\n\nFrom 1996 to 1997, Campbell was a recurring guest star on the show \"Ellen\" as Ed Billik, who becomes Ellen's boss when she sells her bookstore in season four. He is also known for his supporting role as the recurring character Autolycus (\"the King of Thieves\") on both \"\" and \"\", which reunited him with producer Rob Tapert. Campbell played \"Hercules\"/\"Xena\" series producer Tapert in two episodes of \"Hercules\" set in the present. He directed a number of episodes of \"Hercules\" and \"Xena\", including the \"Hercules\" series finale. Campbell also landed the lead role of race car driver Hank Cooper in the Disney made-for-television remake of \"The Love Bug\".\n\nCampbell made a critically acclaimed dramatic guest role as a grief-stricken detective seeking revenge for his father's murder in a two-part episode of the fourth season of \"\". Campbell later played the part of a bigamous demon in \"The X-Files\" episode, \"Terms of Endearment\". He also starred as Agent Jackman in the episode \"Witch Way Now?\" of the WB series \"Charmed\", as well as playing a state police officer in an episode of the short-lived series \"American Gothic\" titled \"Meet the Beetles\".\n\nCampbell co-starred on the television series \"Burn Notice\", which aired from 2007 to 2013 on USA Network. He portrayed Sam Axe, a beer-chugging, womanizing former Navy SEAL now working as an unlicensed private investigator and occasional mercenary with his old friend Michael Westen, the show's main character. When working under cover, his character frequently used the alias Chuck Finley, whom Bruce later revealed was the name of one of his father's old co-workers. Campbell was the star of a 2011 \"Burn Notice\" made-for-television prequel focusing on Sam's Navy SEAL career, titled \"\".\n\nIn 2014, Campbell played Santa Claus in an episode of \"The Librarians\". Campbell played Ronald Reagan in season 2 of the FX original series \"Fargo\". Most recently Campbell is reprising his role as Ashley \"Ash\" Williams in \"Ash vs Evil Dead\", a series based upon the \"Evil Dead\" franchise that launched his career. \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" began airing on Starz on October 31, 2015, and was renewed by the cable channel for second and third seasons.\n\nCampbell is featured as a voice actor in several video game titles. He provides the voice of Ash in the three games based on the \"Evil Dead\" film series: \"\", \"\" and \"\". He also provided voice talent in other titles such as \"\", \"Spider-Man: The Movie\", \"Spider-Man 2\", \"Spider-Man 3\" and \"The Amazing Spider-Man\".\n\nHe provided the voice of main character Jake Logan in the PC title, \"\", the voice of main character Jake Burton in the PlayStation game \"Broken Helix\" and the voice of Magnanimous in \"Megas XLR\". Campbell voiced the pulp adventurer Lobster Johnson in \"\" and has done voice-over work for the Codemaster's game \"Hei$t\", a game which was announced on January 28, 2010 to have been \"terminated\". He also provided the voice of The Mayor in the 2009 film \"Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs\", the voice of Rod \"Torque\" Redline in \"Cars 2\" and the voice of \"Fugax\" in the 2006 film \"The Ant Bully\".\n\nDespite the inclusion of his character \"Ash Williams\" in Telltale Games' \"Poker Night 2\", Danny Webber voices the character in the game, instead of Bruce Campbell.\n\nHe has a voice in the online MOBA game, \"Tome: Immortal Arena\" in 2014. Campbell also provided voice-over and motion capture for Sgt. Lennox in the Exo Zombies mode of \"\".\n\nIn addition to acting and occasionally directing, Campbell has become a writer, starting with an autobiography, \"If Chins Could Kill: Confessions of a B Movie Actor\", published on August 24, 2002. The autobiography was a successful \"New York Times\" Best Seller. The paperback version of the book adds a chapter about the reaction of fans at book signings.\n\"Whenever I do mainstream stuff, I think they're pseudo-interested, but they're still interested in seeing weirdo, offbeat stuff, and that's what I'm attracted to\".\n\"If Chins Could Kill\" follows Campbell's career to date as an actor in low-budget films and television, providing his insight into \"Blue-Collar Hollywood\".\n\nCampbell's next book, \"Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way\" was published on May 26, 2005. The book's plot involves Bruce (depicted in a comical way) as the main character struggling to make it into the world of A-list movies. He later recorded an audio play adaptation of \"Make Love\" with fellow Michigan actors, including longtime collaborator Ted Raimi. This radio drama was released through the independent label Rykodisc and spans 6 discs with a 6-hour running time.\n\nIn addition to his books, Campbell also wrote a column for \"X Ray Magazine\" in 2001, an issue of the popular comic series \"The Hire\", and comic book adaptations of his \"Man with the Screaming Brain\". Most recently he wrote the introduction to Josh Becker's \"The Complete Guide to Low-Budget Feature Filmmaking\".\n\nIn late 2016, Campbell announced that he would be releasing a third book, \"Hail to the Chin: Further Confessions of a B Movie Actor,\" which will detail his life from where \"If Chins Could Kill\" left off. According to his official website, \"Hail to the Chin\" will be released in August 2017.\n\nCampbell maintained a blog on his official website, where he posted mainly about politics and the film industry. The blog has since been discontinued.\n\nSince 2014, the Bruce Campbell Horror Film Festival, narrated and organized by Campbell, has been held in the Muvico Theater in Rosemont, Illinois. The first festival had his original run from August 21 to 25, 2014 presented by Wizard World, as part of the Chicago Comiccon. The second festival ran from August 20 to 23, 2015, with the guests Tom Holland and Eli Roth.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4671", "title": "Baron Aberdare", "text": "Baron Aberdare\n\nBaron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 23 August 1873 for the Liberal politician Henry Bruce. He served as Home Secretary from 1868 to 1873. His grandson, the third Baron, was a soldier, cricketer and tennis player and a member of the International Olympic Committee. His son, the fourth Baron, held office in the Conservative administration of Edward Heath and was later a Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. Lord Aberdare was one of the ninety-two elected hereditary peers that were allowed to remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999. the title is held by his son, the fifth Baron, who succeeded in 2005 and was elected to the House of Lords in 2009.\n\nThe heraldic blazon for the coat of arms of the barony is: \"Or, a saltire gules, on a chief of the last a martlet of the field\".\n\n\nThe heir apparent is the present holder's son the Hon Hector Morys Napier Bruce (b. 1974)\n\n"}
{"id": "4673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4673", "title": "Boy band", "text": "Boy band\n\nA boy band (or boyband) is loosely defined as a vocal group consisting of young male singers, usually in their teenage years or in their twenties at the time of formation, singing love songs marketed towards young females. Being vocal groups, most boy band members do not play musical instruments, either in recording sessions or on stage, making the term something of a misnomer. However, exceptions do exist. Many boy bands dance as well as sing, usually giving highly choreographed performances.\n\nSome such bands form on their own. They can evolve out of church choral or gospel music groups, but are often created by talent managers or record producers who hold auditions. Due to this and their general commercial orientation towards a female audience of preteens, teenyboppers, or teens, the term may be used with negative connotations in music journalism. Boy bands are similar in concept to their counterparts, girl groups. Boy bands' popularity peaked thrice: in the 1960s (e.g., The Jackson 5), in the 1990s and early 2000s when acts such as the Backstreet Boys, *NSYNC, and Westlife, among others, dominated the top of the \"Billboard\" and pop charts, and in the early 2010s with the emergence of new boy bands such as JLS, Big Time Rush and One Direction.\n\nThe earliest forerunner of boy band music began in the late 19th century as a cappella barbershop quartets. They were usually a group of males and sang in four part harmonies. The popularity of barbershop quartets had been prominent into the earlier part of the 20th century. A revival of the male vocal group took place in the late 1940s and 1950s with the use of doo-wop music. Doo-wop bands sang about topics such as love and other themes used in pop music. The earliest traces of boy bands were in the mid-1950s although the term boy band was not used. African American vocal group The Ink Spots was one of the first of what would now be called boy bands. The term boy band was not established until the late 1980s as before that they were called male vocal groups or \"hep harmony singing groups.\n\nAlthough the term \"boy band\" is mostly associated with groups from the 1990s onwards, the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds which helped form the template for boy bands. The Jackson 5 were a family group that established many musical conventions that boy bands follow. For instance, their music featured close harmonies from soul music and catchy pop hooks influenced as much as they were by Motown and acts like the Supremes. All members of the band sang, which is a common convention of a boy band, as opposed to having a front man and the rest on instruments; thus, no one person dominated the stage. Even so, the members conveniently fitted into the convention of having stereotypical personality types (e.g. Michael Jackson being the \"cute one\").\n\nOther antecedents (apart from those already mentioned) exist throughout the history of pop music. The genre has been copied into languages and cultures other than the Anglo-American. The Puerto Rican boy band Menudo, appealing to young Latina audiences, was founded in 1977. Menudo had a convention unique among boy bands: when a member turned 16, became too tall, or their voice changed, they were replaced. The members of Menudo were generally aged 12–17.\n\nThe Bay City Rollers were a Scottish pop band who were most popular in the mid-1970s. The \"British Hit Singles & Albums\" noted that they were \"tartan teen sensations from Edinburgh\", and were \"the first of many acts heralded as the 'Biggest Group since The Beatles' and one of the most screamed-at teeny-bopper acts of the 1970s\". For a relatively brief but fervent period (nicknamed \"Rollermania\"), they were worldwide teen idols. The group were one of the first bands like The Monkees before them to take the formula shown by The Beatles and apply it to a teen market. The group achieved the same amount of success but for a limited period of time. At the peak of their popularity in the UK, comparisons were being made to The Beatles. Also by this time, Bay City Roller fans had a completely distinctive style of dress, the main elements of which were ankle-length tartan trousers and tartan scarves, the group using the benefit of merchandise and promotion.\n\nIn the US, the Cleveland-based power pop group Raspberries was generally interpreted as a \"teen act\", although all the band members played their own music. Vocalist Eric Carmen later commented, \"It was not hip for people to like us, because their little sister liked us.\"\n\nBros (abbreviation of the word \"brothers\") were a British boy band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, consisting of twin brothers Matt and Luke Goss along with Craig Logan. Formed in 1986, they scored multiple top 10 hits between 1987 and 1989. In Britain Bros also became the first modern era–style boy band to have a multiple platinum selling album with \"Push\" in 1988, which is still one of the most successful boyband albums in the UK. Other big boy bands in Britain during the late eighties were Big Fun and Brother Beyond.\n\nBoston group New Edition was formed in 1978 and reached their height of popularity in the 1980s, making them often credited for starting the boy band trend in the 1980s, even though the term \"boy band\" did not exist until the 1990s. Maurice Starr was influenced by New Edition and popularized it with his protégé New Kids on the Block, the first commercially successful modern boy band who formed in 1984 and found international success in 1988. Starr's idea was to take the traditional template from the R&B genre (in this case his teenage band New Edition) and apply it to a pop genre.\n\nSome managers in Europe soon created their own acts after being inspired by New Kids on the Block. First beginning with Nigel Martin-Smith's Take That in the UK who formed in 1990 and followed by Tom Watkins who had success with Bros in the late eighties and formed East 17 in 1991 who were marketed and pitted against Take That as rivals with a harsher attitude, style and sound. Since reforming after a decade-long hiatus, Take That have become one of the most successful groups in British music chart history. Irish music manager Louis Walsh, who had witnessed the impact of these British boy bands, put out an advert for an 'Irish Take That' thereby creating Boyzone in 1993. Let Loose formed in 1993, MN8 and 911 formed in 1995, and Damage formed in 1996 were also boy bands who enjoyed success in Britain; however by the late 1990s all these bands had run their course and split up.\n\nAll these artists were very successful on both the singles and albums charts domestically and internationally however with the emergence of Britpop and the commercial co-option of indie rock, many boy bands were ridiculed by the British music press as having no artistic credibility, although some boy bands, such as East 17 and Take That, did write most of their own material. The media attention was then placed on the \"Battle of Britpop\" and the bands Oasis and Blur replaced the importance and rivalry of Take That and East 17 as the two new biggest bands in Britain. However, other boybands found success in the late nineties like Five, Another Level, Point Break and Westlife. In 1995 successful German music manager Frank Farian who had been manager of Boney M and Milli Vanilli put together Latin American band No Mercy who scored a few worldwide hits during the mid nineties.\n\nAlthough being American and the sons of Tito Jackson, a member of The Jackson 5, 3T had several hits singles across Europe in the mid-1990s, despite limited success in the US, and finished the second biggest selling act of 1996 in Europe behind Spice Girls.\n\nWith the success of North American boybands like New Kids on the Block in East Asia, Japanese entertainment company Johnny & Associates formed SMAP in 1992. The group enjoyed tremendous success, having sold over 35 million records. It paved the way for more Asian boy bands such as Arashi.\nIn the early 1990s in North America, with New Kids on the Block's continued success and Color Me Badd also having success, boy bands became a continued staple of the Billboard charts. Continuing this success in the mid-1990s, most prominent boy bands were African American and had R&B and gospel elements, such as the group All-4-One that formed in 1993 and Boyz II Men that formed in 1988. Boyz II Men are also the most successful boy band act on the U.S. Hot 100 as well as the Australian Singles Chart. Although they had success on the Billboard charts, they weren't marketed towards youth but more towards adults. It was not until 1997 and the change to pop oriented groups like Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, NSYNC, The Moffatts, and Hanson that boy bands exploded commercially and dominated the market in the United States. This late nineties era marked the height of boy band popularity in North America which hasn't been seen since.\n\nArguably the most successful boy band manager from the U.S. was Lou Pearlman, who founded commercially successful acts such as the Backstreet Boys in 1993, NSYNC and LFO in 1995, O-Town in 2000, and US5 in 2005. Backstreet Boys and NSYNC became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s until the early 2000s, and Backstreet Boys went on to become the best selling boy band in history with over 130 million records sold.\n\nIn the late nineties in the UK, producer Simon Cowell (noted in the U.S. for the American Idol/X Factor franchise) is also known for having managed British boyband Five who were formed in 1997 and Irish boyband Westlife formed in 1998. Westlife was created by Irishman Louis Walsh as a replacement for Boyzone and was initially managed by a former member of the band Ronan Keating. Westlife would eventually overtake Take That in number one's tally in the UK although Take That's overall UK sales are still higher. In 2012, the Official Charts Company revealed the biggest selling singles artists in British music chart history with Take That placed 15th overall and the highest selling boyband act (9.3 million), followed by Boyzone at 29 (7.1 million) and Westlife at 34 (6.8 million). Even though Cowell is known to have managed several successful boy bands, he is also infamous for passing on signing two of the biggest boybands to emerge from the 1990s and 2000s, Take That and Busted.\n\nWith the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Westlife, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone (better known today as an Internet meme), and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.\n\nAt the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like The Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act composed of actors. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb.\n\nSince 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade in the western hemisphere, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described \"new boy bands\" that are \"more likely to resemble My Chemical Romance, Sum 41, and Simple Plan.\n\nIn 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama Meteor Garden. Their popularity spread throughout Asia. With their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group's label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who had 13 members at its peak.\n\nJapanese boy band Arashi has sold over 30 million copies of their records since their first release in 1999. They had the yearly best-selling single in Japan in 2008 and 2009. In 2003 SMAP released the single \"Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana\" that has become the fourth best-selling single ever in Japan, with over 2.93 million copies sold.\n\nIn North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel in 2008. Other boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also emerged and experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands haven't seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.\n\nMoving into the 2010s, boy bands are still popular especially in the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe due to the continued commercial presence and longevity of nineties boy bands such as Backstreet Boys and Westlife (before they disbanded in 2012), and the successful comeback of Take That in 2005, Boyzone in 2007, and New Kids on the Block in 2008. Some sections of the press have referred to these acts, particularly those who have reformed after a previous split, such as Take That, Boyzone, and 98 Degrees, as 'man bands'. These older generation boy bands chart alongside the new boy bands.\nIn the early 2010s, there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained, with the emergence of new boy bands like Big Time Rush, The Wanted, and One Direction and the formation of supergroup NKOTBSB which comprised members of New Kids on the Block and Backstreet Boys. NKOTBSB's success inspired boy bands who were fairly popular during the 1990s and 2000s to make a comeback, such as A1, Blue, 98 Degrees, Five, 911, and O-Town. Like 2gether and The Monkees, Big Time Rush was a manufactured act created for a television show.\n\nIn Southeast Asia, local boy bands also emerged as a result of the continued success of Korean and Japanese boy bands such as SMAP, Shinhwa, TVXQ!, Arashi, Exile, Super Junior, Big Bang, SHINee, and EXO. One of the boy bands who emerged as a result of Hallyu (Korean wave) is Indonesia's SM*SH who enjoyed prominent success domestically. In the Philippines, a major boy band has been formed by bringing the first reality boy band search of the country called Pinoy Boyband Superstar which held mid 2016, after all the series of auditions, rigorous training and competition, the winners formed as a group called Boyband PH a five-piece Pinoy boy band which managed by Star Magic\n\nIn South Korea, boy bands have been very successful. On the Gaon Music Chart year-end albums chart of 2016, nine of the top 10 and 17 of the top 20 albums are by boy bands or by subunits/members of boy bands. BIGBANG,EXO had the second and third best-selling albums and a total of six of the top ten albums, including one by a subunit and a solo album by a member of the group. Other boy bands with albums in the yearly top 20 of 2016 are SHINee, GOT7, Seventeen, INFINITE and VIXX.\n\nIn Japan, Arashi continue to be very successful, being the best-selling music artist in Japan in 2016 by value of sales and also having the yearly best-selling album in the country in 2015 and 2016. Other successful Japanese boy bands in this decade include Sandaime J Soul Brothers, the second best-selling music artist of 2016 in the country and Kanjani Eight, the fifth best-selling music artist of that year in Japan.\n\nSeen as important to a \"boy band\" group's commercial success is the group's image, carefully controlled by managing all aspects of the group's attire, promotional materials (which are frequently supplied to teen magazines), and music videos. The key factor of a boy band is being trendy. This means that the band conforms to the most recent fashion and musical trends in the popular music scene. Typically, each member of the group will have some distinguishing feature and be portrayed as having a particular personality stereotype, such as \"the baby,\" \"the bad boy,\" or \"the shy one.\" While managing the portrayal of popular musicians is as old as popular music, the particular pigeonholing of band members is a defining characteristic of boy and girl bands.\n\nIn most cases, their music is written, arranged and produced by a producer who works with the band at all times and controls the group's sound – if necessary, to the point of hiring session singers to record guide vocals for each member of the group to sing individually if the members cannot harmonize well together. However, for clarity of each voice, recording each voice individually is most commonly the norm with most modern vocal groups. In recent years auto-tune has become a popular tool for boy bands who are unable to sing to a high standard. Some boy bands have come under fire for this issue of using auto-tune. Some have also come under fire for lip syncing in their performances as well, for example New Kids on the Block.\n\nA typical boy band performance features elaborately choreographed dancing, with the members taking turns singing and/or rapping. Boy bands generally do not compose or produce their own material, unless the members lobby hard enough for creative control. However, some bands were created around the talent of a songwriter within the group like Gary Barlow of Take That or Tony Mortimer of East 17. It is not uncommon to find extra songs on an album written by one or more of the band members; however, their producers rarely use these as singles.\n\nSince the 21st century, however, boy bands have been expected to write or at least contribute in some part lyrically to songs. Apart from the groups mentioned above who all had at least one primary songwriter from their beginning, other groups soon caught up. From the late nineties, members of Backstreet Boys who had previously used writers like Max Martin during their early albums began writing their own songs. Newer groups from late 2000s such as JLS have all made a point from early interviews that they write their own songs and hold their own image as this is an important part of marketing. Some bands like The Wanted have even spent time learning the craft of songwriting.\n\nIndividuals can also go on to achieve greater success as a solo artist coming out of a boy band having used the groups popularity to build on. Usually this signals the end of the group until potential future reunions. Examples of this include Michael Jackson from The Jackson 5, Donny Osmond from The Osmonds, Ricky Martin from Menudo, Justin Timberlake from *NSYNC, and Ronan Keating from Boyzone. Sometimes the most successful solo star from a band is not the most popular member such as Robbie Williams as opposed to lead singer Gary Barlow from Take That. Some boy band members have gone on to successful careers elsewhere in the media. Michael Dolenz of The Monkees went on to become a successful television producer, working for ITV franchises such as LWT and Television South.\n\nAlthough most boy bands consist of R&B or pop influences, other music genres, most notably country music and folk music, are also represented. South 65 and Marshall Dyllon, for example, were both country music boy bands. Il Divo, created by Simon Cowell in 2004, are a vocal group that performs operatic pop in several (mainly Italian) languages. Since then operatic/classical boy bands have become quite popular and common, especially in the UK. Since 2001 there has been some crossover with power pop and pop punk from bands that play live instruments. Just recently some boy bands decided to go back to their original doo-wop roots, most notably, The Overtones.\n\nSince the 2000s, groups such as Backstreet Boys and LFO have disliked the term \"boy band\" and have preferred to be known as a \"male vocal group\". Being categorized among boy bands was also the main reason The Moffatts split up. Boy bands have been accused by the music press of emphasizing the appearance and marketing of the group above the quality of music, deliberately trying to appeal to a preteen audience and for conforming to trends instead of being original. Such criticisms can become extremely scathing. Boy bands are often seen as being short lived, although some acts such as The Jackson 5, Backstreet Boys, Hanson, Human Nature, New Edition, SMAP, Shinhwa and Westlife (before they split up in 2012) have sustained lasting careers.\n\nDespite negative critical reception, boy bands continue to be generally successful, with some notable ones managing to sell tens of millions of records, placing them among the world's best selling music artists. The best-selling boy bands based on sales figures are:\n\n"}
{"id": "4674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4674", "title": "B-tree", "text": "B-tree\n\nIn computer science, a B-tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that keeps data sorted and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time. The B-tree is a generalization of a binary search tree in that a node can have more than two children . Unlike self-balancing binary search trees, the B-tree is optimized for systems that read and write large blocks of data. B-trees are a good example of a data structure for external memory. It is commonly used in databases and filesystems.\n\nIn B-trees, internal (non-leaf) nodes can have a variable number of child nodes within some pre-defined range. When data is inserted or removed from a node, its number of child nodes changes. In order to maintain the pre-defined range, internal nodes may be joined or split. Because a range of child nodes is permitted, B-trees do not need re-balancing as frequently as other self-balancing search trees, but may waste some space, since nodes are not entirely full. The lower and upper bounds on the number of child nodes are typically fixed for a particular implementation. For example, in a 2-3 B-tree (often simply referred to as a 2-3 tree), each internal node may have only 2 or 3 child nodes.\n\nEach internal node of a B-tree contains a number of keys. The keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: \"a\" and \"a\". All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than \"a\", all values in the middle subtree will be between \"a\" and \"a\", and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than \"a\".\n\nUsually, the number of keys is chosen to vary between formula_1 and formula_2, where formula_1 is the minimum number of keys, and formula_4 is the minimum degree or branching factor of the tree. In practice, the keys take up the most space in a node. The factor of 2 will guarantee that nodes can be split or combined. If an internal node has formula_2 keys, then adding a key to that node can be accomplished by splitting the hypothetical formula_6 key node into two formula_1 key nodes and moving the key that would have been in the middle to the parent node. Each split node has the required minimum number of keys. Similarly, if an internal node and its neighbor each have formula_1 keys, then a key may be deleted from the internal node by combining it with its neighbor. Deleting the key would make the internal node have formula_9 keys; joining the neighbor would add formula_1 keys plus one more key brought down from the neighbor's parent. The result is an entirely full node of formula_2 keys.\n\nThe number of branches (or child nodes) from a node will be one more than the number of keys stored in the node. In a 2-3 B-tree, the internal nodes will store either one key (with two child nodes) or two keys (with three child nodes). A B-tree is sometimes described with the parameters formula_12 — formula_13 or simply with the highest branching order, formula_13.\n\nA B-tree is kept balanced by requiring that all leaf nodes be at the same depth. This depth will increase slowly as elements are added to the tree, but an increase in the overall depth is infrequent, and results in all leaf nodes being one more node farther away from the root.\n\nB-trees have substantial advantages over alternative implementations when the time to access the data of a node greatly exceeds the time spent processing that data, because then the cost of accessing the node may be amortized over multiple operations within the node. This usually occurs when the node data are in secondary storage such as disk drives. By maximizing the number of keys within each internal node, the height of the tree decreases and the number of expensive node accesses is reduced. In addition, rebalancing of the tree occurs less often. The maximum number of child nodes depends on the information that must be stored for each child node and the size of a full disk block or an analogous size in secondary storage. While 2-3 B-trees are easier to explain, practical B-trees using secondary storage need a large number of child nodes to improve performance.\n\nThe term B-tree may refer to a specific design or it may refer to a general class of designs. In the narrow sense, a B-tree stores keys in its internal nodes but need not store those keys in the records at the leaves. The general class includes variations such as the B+ tree and the B tree.\n\nRudolf Bayer and Ed McCreight invented the B-tree while working at Boeing Research Labs in 1971 , but they did not explain what, if anything, the \"B\" stands for. Douglas Comer explains:\nThe origin of \"B-tree\" has never been explained by the authors. As we shall see, \"balanced,\" \"broad,\" or \"bushy\" might apply. Others suggest that the \"B\" stands for Boeing. Because of his contributions, however, it seems appropriate to think of B-trees as \"Bayer\"-trees. \n\nDonald Knuth speculates on the etymology of B-trees in his May, 1980 lecture on the topic \"CS144C classroom lecture about disk storage and B-trees\", suggesting the \"B\" may have originated from Boeing or from Bayer's name.\n\nEd McCreight answered a question on B-tree's name in 2013: \nBayer and I were in a lunchtime where we get to think [of] a name. And ... B is, you know ... We were working for Boeing at the time, we couldn't use the name without talking to lawyers. So, there is a B. [The B-tree] has to do with balance, another B. Bayer was the senior author, who [was] several years older than I am and had many more publications than I did. So there is another B. And so, at the lunch table we never did resolve whether there was one of those that made more sense than the rest. What really lives to say is: the more you think about what the B in B-trees means, the better you understand B-trees.\"\n\nUsually, sorting and searching algorithms have been characterized by the number of comparison operations that must be performed using order notation. A binary search of a sorted table with records, for example, can be done in roughly comparisons. If the table had 1,000,000 records, then a specific record could be located with at most 20 comparisons: .\n\nLarge databases have historically been kept on disk drives. The time to read a record on a disk drive far exceeds the time needed to compare keys once the record is available. The time to read a record from a disk drive involves a seek time and a rotational delay. The seek time may be 0 to 20 or more milliseconds, and the rotational delay averages about half the rotation period. For a 7200 RPM drive, the rotation period is 8.33 milliseconds. For a drive such as the Seagate ST3500320NS, the track-to-track seek time is 0.8 milliseconds and the average reading seek time is 8.5 milliseconds. For simplicity, assume reading from disk takes about 10 milliseconds.\n\nNaively, then, the time to locate one record out of a million would take 20 disk reads times 10 milliseconds per disk read, which is 0.2 seconds.\n\nThe time won't be that bad because individual records are grouped together in a disk block. A disk block might be 16 kilobytes. If each record is 160 bytes, then 100 records could be stored in each block. The disk read time above was actually for an entire block. Once the disk head is in position, one or more disk blocks can be read with little delay. With 100 records per block, the last 6 or so comparisons don't need to do any disk reads—the comparisons are all within the last disk block read.\n\nTo speed the search further, the first 13 to 14 comparisons (which each required a disk access) must be sped up.\n\nA significant improvement can be made with an index. In the example above, initial disk reads narrowed the search range by a factor of two. That can be improved substantially by creating an auxiliary index that contains the first record in each disk block (sometimes called a sparse index). This auxiliary index would be 1% of the size of the original database, but it can be searched more quickly. Finding an entry in the auxiliary index would tell us which block to search in the main database; after searching the auxiliary index, we would have to search only that one block of the main database—at a cost of one more disk read. The index would hold 10,000 entries, so it would take at most 14 comparisons. Like the main database, the last 6 or so comparisons in the aux index would be on the same disk block. The index could be searched in about 8 disk reads, and the desired record could be accessed in 9 disk reads.\n\nThe trick of creating an auxiliary index can be repeated to make an auxiliary index to the auxiliary index. That would make an aux-aux index that would need only 100 entries and would fit in one disk block.\n\nInstead of reading 14 disk blocks to find the desired record, we only need to read 3 blocks. Reading and searching the first (and only) block of the aux-aux index identifies the relevant block in aux-index. Reading and searching that aux-index block identifies the relevant block in the main database. Instead of 150 milliseconds, we need only 30 milliseconds to get the record.\n\nThe auxiliary indices have turned the search problem from a binary search requiring roughly disk reads to one requiring only disk reads where is the blocking factor (the number of entries per block: entries per block in our example; reads).\n\nIn practice, if the main database is being frequently searched, the aux-aux index and much of the aux index may reside in a disk cache, so they would not incur a disk read.\n\nIf the database does not change, then compiling the index is simple to do, and the index need never be changed. If there are changes, then managing the database and its index becomes more complicated.\n\nDeleting records from a database is relatively easy. The index can stay the same, and the record can just be marked as deleted. The database remains in sorted order. If there are a large number of deletions, then searching and storage become less efficient.\n\nInsertions can be very slow in a sorted sequential file because room for the inserted record must be made. Inserting a record before the first record requires shifting all of the records down one. Such an operation is just too expensive to be practical. One solution is to leave some spaces. Instead of densely packing all the records in a block, the block can have some free space to allow for subsequent insertions. Those spaces would be marked as if they were \"deleted\" records.\n\nBoth insertions and deletions are fast as long as space is available on a block. If an insertion won't fit on the block, then some free space on some nearby block must be found and the auxiliary indices adjusted. The hope is that enough space is available nearby, such that a lot of blocks do not need to be reorganized. Alternatively, some out-of-sequence disk blocks may be used.\n\nThe B-tree uses all of the ideas described above. In particular, a B-tree:\n\nIn addition, a B-tree minimizes waste by making sure the interior nodes are at least half full. A B-tree can handle an arbitrary number of insertions and deletions.\n\nThe literature on B-trees is not uniform in its terminology .\n\n, , and others define the order of B-tree as the minimum number of keys in a non-root node. points out that terminology is ambiguous because the maximum number of keys is not clear. An order 3 B-tree might hold a maximum of 6 keys or a maximum of 7 keys. avoids the problem by defining the order to be maximum number of children (which is one more than the maximum number of keys).\n\nThe term leaf is also inconsistent. considered the leaf level to be the lowest level of keys, but Knuth considered the leaf level to be one level below the lowest keys . There are many possible implementation choices. In some designs, the leaves may hold the entire data record; in other designs, the leaves may only hold pointers to the data record. Those choices are not fundamental to the idea of a B-tree.\n\nThere are also unfortunate choices like using the variable \"k\" to represent the number of children when \"k\" could be confused with the number of keys.\n\nFor simplicity, most authors assume there are a fixed number of keys that fit in a node. The basic assumption is the key size is fixed and the node size is fixed. In practice, variable length keys may be employed .\n\nAccording to Knuth's definition, a B-tree of order \"m\" is a tree which satisfies the following properties:\n\n\nEach internal node’s keys act as separation values which divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees) then it must have 2 keys: \"a\" and \"a\". All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than \"a\", all values in the middle subtree will be between \"a\" and \"a\", and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than \"a\".\n\n\n\n\nA B-tree of depth \"n\"+1 can hold about \"U\" times as many items as a B-tree of depth \"n\", but the cost of search, insert, and delete operations grows with the depth of the tree. As with any balanced tree, the cost grows much more slowly than the number of elements.\n\nSome balanced trees store values only at leaf nodes, and use different kinds of nodes for leaf nodes and internal nodes. B-trees keep values in every node in the tree, and may use the same structure for all nodes. However, since leaf nodes never have children, the B-trees benefit from improved performance if they use a specialized structure.\n\nLet \"h\" be the height of the classic B-tree. Let \"n\" > 0 be the number of entries in the tree. Let \"m\" be the maximum number of children a node can have. Each node can have at most \"m\"−1 keys.\n\nIt can be shown (by induction for example) that a B-tree of height \"h\" with all its nodes completely filled has \"n\"= \"m\"−1 entries. Hence, the best case height of a B-tree is:\n\nLet \"d\" be the minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node can have. For an ordinary B-tree, \"d\"=⌈\"m\"/2⌉.\n\nSearching is similar to searching a binary search tree. Starting at the root, the tree is recursively traversed from top to bottom. At each level, the search reduces its field of view to the child pointer (subtree) whose range includes the search value. A subtree's range is defined by the values, or keys, contained in its parent node. These limiting values are also known as separation values.\n\nBinary search is typically (but not necessarily) used within nodes to find the separation values and child tree of interest.\n\nAll insertions start at a leaf node. To insert a new element, search the tree to find the leaf node where the new element should be added. Insert the new element into that node with the following steps:\n\n\nIf the splitting goes all the way up to the root, it creates a new root with a single separator value and two children, which is why the lower bound on the size of internal nodes does not apply to the root. The maximum number of elements per node is \"U\"−1. When a node is split, one element moves to the parent, but one element is added. So, it must be possible to divide the maximum number \"U\"−1 of elements into two legal nodes. If this number is odd, then \"U\"=2\"L\" and one of the new nodes contains (\"U\"−2)/2 = \"L\"−1 elements, and hence is a legal node, and the other contains one more element, and hence it is legal too. If \"U\"−1 is even, then \"U\"=2\"L\"−1, so there are 2\"L\"−2 elements in the node. Half of this number is \"L\"−1, which is the minimum number of elements allowed per node.\n\nAn improved algorithm supports a single pass down the tree from the root to the node where the insertion will take place, splitting any full nodes encountered on the way. This prevents the need to recall the parent nodes into memory, which may be expensive if the nodes are on secondary storage. However, to use this improved algorithm, we must be able to send one element to the parent and split the remaining \"U\"−2 elements into two legal nodes, without adding a new element. This requires \"U\" = 2\"L\" rather than \"U\" = 2\"L\"−1, which accounts for why some textbooks impose this requirement in defining B-trees.\n\nThere are two popular strategies for deletion from a B-tree.\n\n\nThe algorithm below uses the former strategy.\n\nThere are two special cases to consider when deleting an element:\n\n\nThe procedures for these cases are in order below.\n\n\nEach element in an internal node acts as a separation value for two subtrees, therefore we need to find a replacement for separation. Note that the largest element in the left subtree is still less than the separator. Likewise, the smallest element in the right subtree is still greater than the separator. Both of those elements are in leaf nodes, and either one can be the new separator for the two subtrees. Algorithmically described below:\n\n\nRebalancing starts from a leaf and proceeds toward the root until the tree is balanced. If deleting an element from a node has brought it under the minimum size, then some elements must be redistributed to bring all nodes up to the minimum. Usually, the redistribution involves moving an element from a sibling node that has more than the minimum number of nodes. That redistribution operation is called a rotation. If no sibling can spare an element, then the deficient node must be merged with a sibling. The merge causes the parent to lose a separator element, so the parent may become deficient and need rebalancing. The merging and rebalancing may continue all the way to the root. Since the minimum element count doesn't apply to the root, making the root be the only deficient node is not a problem. The algorithm to rebalance the tree is as follows:\n\n\nWhile freshly loaded databases tend to have good sequential behavior, this behavior becomes increasingly difficult to maintain as a database grows, resulting in more random I/O and performance challenges.\n\nIn applications, it is frequently useful to build a B-tree to represent a large existing collection of data and then update it incrementally using standard B-tree operations. In this case, the most efficient way to construct the initial B-tree is not to insert every element in the initial collection successively, but instead to construct the initial set of leaf nodes directly from the input, then build the internal nodes from these. This approach to B-tree construction is called bulkloading. Initially, every leaf but the last one has one extra element, which will be used to build the internal nodes.\n\nFor example, if the leaf nodes have maximum size 4 and the initial collection is the integers 1 through 24, we would initially construct 4 leaf nodes containing 5 values each and 1 which contains 4 values:\n\nWe build the next level up from the leaves by taking the last element from each leaf node except the last one. Again, each node except the last will contain one extra value. In the example, suppose the internal nodes contain at most 2 values (3 child pointers). Then the next level up of internal nodes would be:\n\nThis process is continued until we reach a level with only one node and it is not overfilled. In the example only the root level remains:\n\nIn addition to its use in databases, the B-tree (or ) is also used in filesystems to allow quick random access to an arbitrary block in a particular file. The basic problem is turning the file block formula_17 address into a disk block (or perhaps to a cylinder-head-sector) address.\n\nSome operating systems require the user to allocate the maximum size of the file when the file is created. The file can then be allocated as contiguous disk blocks. In that case, to convert the file block address formula_17 into a disk block address, the operating system simply adds the file block address formula_17 to the address of the first disk block constituting the file. The scheme is simple, but the file cannot exceed its created size.\n\nOther operating systems allow a file to grow. The resulting disk blocks may not be contiguous, so mapping logical blocks to physical blocks is more involved.\n\nMS-DOS, for example, used a simple File Allocation Table (FAT). The FAT has an entry for each disk block, and that entry identifies whether its block is used by a file and if so, which block (if any) is the next disk block of the same file. So, the allocation of each file is represented as a linked list in the table. In order to find the disk address of file block formula_17, the operating system (or disk utility) must sequentially follow the file's linked list in the FAT. Worse, to find a free disk block, it must sequentially scan the FAT. For MS-DOS, that was not a huge penalty because the disks and files were small and the FAT had few entries and relatively short file chains. In the FAT12 filesystem (used on floppy disks and early hard disks), there were no more than 4,080 entries, and the FAT would usually be resident in memory. As disks got bigger, the FAT architecture began to confront penalties. On a large disk using FAT, it may be necessary to perform disk reads to learn the disk location of a file block to be read or written.\n\nTOPS-20 (and possibly TENEX) used a 0 to 2 level tree that has similarities to a B-tree. A disk block was 512 36-bit words. If the file fit in a 512 (2) word block, then the file directory would point to that physical disk block. If the file fit in 2 words, then the directory would point to an aux index; the 512 words of that index would either be NULL (the block isn't allocated) or point to the physical address of the block. If the file fit in 2 words, then the directory would point to a block holding an aux-aux index; each entry would either be NULL or point to an aux index. Consequently, the physical disk block for a 2 word file could be located in two disk reads and read on the third.\n\nApple's filesystem HFS+, Microsoft's NTFS, AIX (jfs2) and some Linux filesystems, such as btrfs and Ext4, use B-trees.\n\nB-trees are used in the HFS and Reiser4 file systems.\n\nLehman and Yao showed that all the read locks could be avoided (and thus concurrent access greatly improved) by linking the tree blocks at each level together with a \"next\" pointer. This results in a tree structure where both insertion and search operations descend from the root to the leaf. Write locks are only required as a tree block is modified. This maximizes access concurrency by multiple users, an important consideration for databases and/or other B-tree based ISAM storage methods. The cost associated with this improvement is that empty pages cannot be removed from the btree during normal operations. (However, see for various strategies to implement node merging, and source code at.)\n\nUnited States Patent 5283894, granted in 1994, appears to show a way to use a 'Meta Access Method' to allow concurrent B+ tree access and modification without locks. The technique accesses the tree 'upwards' for both searches and updates by means of additional in-memory indexes that point at the blocks in each level in the block cache. No reorganization for deletes is needed and there are no 'next' pointers in each block as in Lehman and Yao.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4675", "title": "British Museum", "text": "British Museum\n\nThe British Museum, located in the Bloomsbury area of London, United Kingdom, is a public institution dedicated to human history, art and culture. Its permanent collection, numbering some 8 million works, is among the largest and most comprehensive in existence and originates from all continents, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present.\n\nThe British Museum was established in 1753, largely based on the collections of the physician and scientist Sir Hans Sloane. The museum first opened to the public on 15 January 1759, in Montagu House, on the site of the current building. Its expansion over the following two and a half centuries was largely a result of an expanding British colonial footprint and has resulted in the creation of several branch institutions, the first being the British Museum of Natural History in South Kensington in 1881 (it is nowadays simply called the Natural History Museum, and is separate and independent).\n\nIn 1973, the British Library Act 1972 detached the library department from the British Museum, but it continued to host the now separated British Library in the same Reading Room and building as the museum until 1997. The museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, and as with all other national museums in the United Kingdom it charges no admission fee, except for loan exhibitions.\n\nAlthough today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities, the British Museum was founded as a \"universal museum\". Its foundations lie in the will of the Irish-born British physician and naturalist Sir Hans Sloane (1660–1753). During the course of his lifetime Sloane gathered an enviable collection of curiosities and, not wishing to see his collection broken up after death, he bequeathed it to King George II, for the nation, for a sum of £20,000.\n\nAt that time, Sloane's collection consisted of around 71,000 objects of all kinds including some 40,000 printed books, 7,000 manuscripts, extensive natural history specimens including 337 volumes of dried plants, prints and drawings including those by Albrecht Dürer and antiquities from Sudan, Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Ancient Near and Far East and the Americas.\n\nOn 7 June 1753, King George II gave his formal assent to the Act of Parliament which established the British Museum. The British Museum Act 1753 also added two other libraries to the Sloane collection, namely the Cottonian Library, assembled by Sir Robert Cotton, dated back to Elizabethan times and the Harleian library, the collection of the Earls of Oxford. They were joined in 1757 by the \"Old Royal Library\", now the Royal manuscripts, assembled by various British monarchs. Together these four \"foundation collections\" included many of the most treasured books now in the British Library including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the sole surviving manuscript of \"Beowulf\".\n\nThe British Museum was the first of a new kind of museum – national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. Sloane's collection, while including a vast miscellany of objects, tended to reflect his scientific interests. The addition of the Cotton and Harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element and meant that the British Museum now became both National Museum and library.\n\nThe body of trustees decided on a converted 17th-century mansion, Montagu House, as a location for the museum, which it bought from the Montagu family for £20,000. The Trustees rejected Buckingham House, on the site now occupied by Buckingham Palace, on the grounds of cost and the unsuitability of its location.\n\nWith the acquisition of Montagu House the first exhibition galleries and reading room for scholars opened on 15 January 1759. In 1823, King George IV gave the King's Library assembled by George III, and Parliament gave the right to a copy of every book published in the country, thereby ensuring that the Museum's library would expand indefinitely. During the few years after its foundation the British Museum received several further gifts, including the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts and David Garrick's library of 1,000 printed plays. The predominance of natural history, books and manuscripts began to lessen when in 1772 the Museum acquired for £8,410 its first significant antiquities in Sir William Hamilton's \"first\" collection of Greek vases.\n\nFrom 1778, a display of objects from the South Seas brought back from the round-the-world voyages of Captain James Cook and the travels of other explorers fascinated visitors with a glimpse of previously unknown lands. The bequest of a collection of books, engraved gems, coins, prints and drawings by Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode in 1800 did much to raise the Museum's reputation; but Montagu House became increasingly crowded and decrepit and it was apparent that it would be unable to cope with further expansion.\n\nThe museum's first notable addition towards its collection of antiquities, since its foundation, was by Sir William Hamilton (1730–1803), British Ambassador to Naples, who sold his collection of Greek and Roman artefacts to the museum in 1784 together with a number of other antiquities and natural history specimens. A list of donations to the Museum, dated 31 January 1784, refers to the Hamilton bequest of a \"Colossal Foot of an Apollo in Marble\". It was one of two antiquities of Hamilton's collection drawn for him by Francesco Progenie, a pupil of Pietro Fabris, who also contributed a number of drawings of Mount Vesuvius sent by Hamilton to the Royal Society in London.\n\nIn the early 19th century the foundations for the extensive collection of sculpture began to be laid and Greek, Roman and Egyptian artefacts dominated the antiquities displays. After the defeat of the French campaign in the Battle of the Nile, in 1801, the British Museum acquired more Egyptian sculptures and in 1802 King George III presented the Rosetta Stone – key to the deciphering of hieroglyphs. Gifts and purchases from Henry Salt, British consul general in Egypt, beginning with the Colossal bust of Ramesses II in 1818, laid the foundations of the collection of Egyptian Monumental Sculpture. Many Greek sculptures followed, notably the first purpose-built exhibition space, the Charles Towneley collection, much of it Roman Sculpture, in 1805. In 1806, Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803 removed the large collection of marble sculptures from the Parthenon, on the Acropolis in Athens and transferred them to the UK. In 1816 these masterpieces of western art, were acquired by The British Museum by Act of Parliament and deposited in the museum thereafter. The collections were supplemented by the Bassae frieze from Phigaleia, Greece in 1815. The Ancient Near Eastern collection also had its beginnings in 1825 with the purchase of Assyrian and Babylonian antiquities from the widow of Claudius James Rich.\n\nIn 1802 a Buildings Committee was set-up to plan for expansion of the museum, and further highlighted by the donation in 1822 of the King's Library, personal library of King George III's, comprising 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, maps, charts and topographical drawings. The neoclassical architect, Sir Robert Smirke, was asked to draw up plans for an eastern extension to the Museum \"... for the reception of the Royal Library, and a Picture Gallery over it ...\" and put forward plans for today's quadrangular building, much of which can be seen today. The dilapidated Old Montagu House was demolished and work on the King's Library Gallery began in 1823. The extension, the East Wing, was completed by 1831. However, following the founding of the National Gallery, London in 1824, the proposed Picture Gallery was no longer needed, and the space on the upper floor was given over to the Natural history collections.\n\nThe Museum became a construction site as Sir Robert Smirke's grand neo-classical building gradually arose. The King's Library, on the ground floor of the East Wing, was handed over in 1827, and was described as one of the finest rooms in London. Although it was not fully open to the general public until 1857, special openings were arranged during The Great Exhibition of 1851. In spite of dirt and disruption the collections grew, outpacing the new building.\n\nIn 1840, the Museum became involved in its first overseas excavations, Charles Fellows's expedition to Xanthos, in Asia Minor, whence came remains of the tombs of the rulers of ancient Lycia, among them the Nereid and Payava monuments. In 1857, Charles Newton was to discover the 4th-century BC Mausoleum of Halikarnassos, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. In the 1840s and 1850s the Museum supported excavations in Assyria by A.H. Layard and others at sites such as Nimrud and Nineveh. Of particular interest to curators was the eventual discovery of Ashurbanipal's great library of cuneiform tablets, which helped to make the Museum a focus for Assyrian studies.\n\nSir Thomas Grenville (1755–1846), a Trustee of The British Museum from 1830, assembled a library of 20,240 volumes, which he left to the Museum in his will. The books arrived in January 1847 in twenty-one horse-drawn vans. The only vacant space for this large library was a room originally intended for manuscripts, between the Front Entrance Hall and the Manuscript Saloon. The books remained here until the British Library moved to St Pancras in 1998.\n\nThe opening of the forecourt in 1852 marked the completion of Robert Smirke's 1823 plan, but already adjustments were having to be made to cope with the unforeseen growth of the collections. Infill galleries were constructed for Assyrian sculptures and Sydney Smirke's Round Reading Room, with space for a million books, opened in 1857. Because of continued pressure on space the decision was taken to move natural history to a new building in South Kensington, which would later become the British Museum of Natural History.\n\nRoughly contemporary with the construction of the new building was the career of a man sometimes called the \"second founder\" of the British Museum, the Italian librarian Anthony Panizzi. Under his supervision, the British Museum Library (now part of the British Library) quintupled in size and became a well-organised institution worthy of being called a national library, the largest library in the world after the National Library of Paris. The quadrangle at the centre of Smirke's design proved to be a waste of valuable space and was filled at Panizzi's request by a circular Reading Room of cast iron, designed by Smirke's brother, Sydney Smirke.\n\nUntil the mid-19th century, the Museum's collections were relatively circumscribed but, in 1851, with the appointment to the staff of Augustus Wollaston Franks to curate the collections, the Museum began for the first time to collect British and European medieval antiquities, prehistory, branching out into Asia and diversifying its holdings of ethnography. A real coup for the museum was the purchase in 1867, over French objections, of the Duke of Blacas's wide-ranging and valuable collection of antiquities. Overseas excavations continued and John Turtle Wood discovered the remains of the 4th century BC Temple of Artemis at Ephesos, another Wonder of the Ancient World.\n\nThe natural history collections were an integral part of the British Museum until their removal to the new British Museum of Natural History in 1887, nowadays the Natural History Museum. With the departure and the completion of the new White Wing (fronting Montague Street) in 1884, more space was available for antiquities and ethnography and the library could further expand. This was a time of innovation as electric lighting was introduced in the Reading Room and exhibition galleries.\n\nThe William Burges collection of armoury was bequeathed to the museum in 1881. In 1882, the Museum was involved in the establishment of the independent Egypt Exploration Fund (now Society) the first British body to carry out research in Egypt. A bequest from Miss Emma Turner in 1892 financed excavations in Cyprus. In 1897 the death of the great collector and curator, A.W. Franks, was followed by an immense bequest of 3,300 finger rings, 153 drinking vessels, 512 pieces of continental porcelain, 1,500 netsuke, 850 inro, over 30,000 bookplates and miscellaneous items of jewellery and plate, among them the Oxus Treasure.\n\nIn 1898 Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild bequeathed the Waddesdon Bequest, the glittering contents from his New Smoking Room at Waddesdon Manor. This consisted of almost 300 pieces of \"objets d'art et de vertu\" which included exquisite examples of jewellery, plate, enamel, carvings, glass and maiolica, among them the Holy Thorn Reliquary, probably created in the 1390s in Paris for John, Duke of Berry. The collection was in the tradition of a schatzkammer or treasure house such as those formed by the Renaissance princes of Europe. Baron Ferdinand's will was most specific, and failure to observe the terms would make it void, the collection should be\n\nBy the last years of the 19th century, The British Museum's collections had increased so much that the Museum building was no longer big enough for them. In 1895 the trustees purchased the 69 houses surrounding the Museum with the intention of demolishing them and building around the West, North and East sides of the Museum. The first stage was the construction of the northern wing beginning 1906.\n\nAll the while, the collections kept growing. Emil Torday collected in Central Africa, Aurel Stein in Central Asia, D.G. Hogarth, Leonard Woolley and T. E. Lawrence excavated at Carchemish. Around this time, the American collector and philanthropist J Pierpont Morgan donated a substantial number of objects to the museum, including William Greenwell's collection of prehistoric artefacts from across Europe which he had purchased for £10,000 in 1908. Morgan had also acquired a major part of Sir John Evans's coin collection, which was later sold to the museum by his son John Pierpont Morgan Junior in 1915. In 1918, because of the threat of wartime bombing, some objects were evacuated to a Postal Tube Railway at Holborn, the National Library of Wales (Aberystwyth) and a country house near Malvern. On the return of antiquities from wartime storage in 1919 some objects were found to have deteriorated. A temporary conservation laboratory was set up in May 1920 and became a permanent department in 1931. It is today the oldest in continuous existence. In 1923, the British Museum welcomed over one million visitors.\n\nNew mezzanine floors were constructed and book stacks rebuilt in an attempt to cope with the flood of books. In 1931, the art dealer Sir Joseph Duveen offered funds to build a gallery for the Parthenon sculptures. Designed by the American architect John Russell Pope, it was completed in 1938. The appearance of the exhibition galleries began to change as dark Victorian reds gave way to modern pastel shades. However, in August 1939, due to the imminence of war and the likelihood of air-raids the Parthenon Sculptures along with Museum's most valued collections were dispersed to secure basements, country house, Aldwych tube station, the National Library of Wales and a quarry. The evacuation was timely, for in 1940 the Duveen Gallery was severely damaged by bombing. Meanwhile, prior to the war, the Nazis had sent a researcher to the British Museum for several years with the aim of \"compiling an anti-Semitic history of Anglo-Jewry.\" After the war, the Museum continued to collect from all countries and all centuries: among the most spectacular additions were the 2600 BC Mesopotamian treasure from Ur, discovered during Leonard Woolley's 1922–34 excavations. Gold, silver and garnet grave goods from the Anglo-Saxon ship burial at Sutton Hoo (1939) and late Roman silver tableware from Mildenhall, Suffolk (1946). The immediate post-war years were taken up with the return of the collections from protection and the restoration of the museum after the Blitz. Work also began on restoring the damaged Duveen Gallery.\n\nIn 1953, the Museum celebrated its bicentenary. Many changes followed: the first full-time in house designer and publications officer were appointed in 1964, A Friends organisation was set up in 1968, an Education Service established in 1970 and publishing house in 1973. In 1963, a new Act of Parliament introduced administrative reforms. It became easier to lend objects, the constitution of the Board of Trustees changed and the Natural History Museum became fully independent. By 1959 the Coins and Medals office suite, completely destroyed during the war, was rebuilt and re-opened, attention turned towards the gallery work with new tastes in design leading to the remodelling of Robert Smirke's Classical and Near Eastern galleries. In 1962 the Duveen Gallery was finally restored and the Parthenon Sculptures were moved back into it, once again at the heart of the museum.\n\nBy the 1970s the Museum was again expanding. More services for the public were introduced; visitor numbers soared, with the temporary exhibition \"Treasures of Tutankhamun\" in 1972, attracting 1,694,117 visitors, the most successful in British history. In the same year the Act of Parliament establishing the British Library was passed, separating the collection of manuscripts and printed books from the British Museum. This left the Museum with antiquities; coins, medals and paper money; prints & drawings; and ethnography. A pressing problem was finding space for additions to the library which now required an extra 1 miles of shelving each year. The Government suggested a site at St Pancras for the new British Library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997.\n\nThe departure of the British Library to a new site at St Pancras, finally achieved in 1998, provided the space needed for the books. It also created the opportunity to redevelop the vacant space in Robert Smirke's 19th-century central quadrangle into the Queen Elizabeth II Great Court – the largest covered square in Europe – which opened in 2000. The ethnography collections, which had been housed in the short-lived Museum of Mankind at 6 Burlington Gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries in the museum in 2000.\n\nThe Museum again readjusted its collecting policies as interest in \"modern\" objects: prints, drawings, medals and the decorative arts reawakened. Ethnographical fieldwork was carried out in places as diverse as New Guinea, Madagascar, Romania, Guatemala and Indonesia and there were excavations in the Near East, Egypt, Sudan and the UK. The Weston Gallery of Roman Britain, opened in 1997, displayed a number of recently discovered hoards which demonstrated the richness of what had been considered an unimportant part of the Roman Empire. The Museum turned increasingly towards private funds for buildings, acquisitions and other purposes.\n\nToday the museum no longer houses collections of natural history, and the books and manuscripts it once held now form part of the independent British Library. The Museum nevertheless preserves its universality in its collections of artefacts representing the cultures of the world, ancient and modern. The original 1753 collection has grown to over thirteen million objects at the British Museum, 70 million at the Natural History Museum and 150 million at the British Library.\n\nThe Round Reading Room, which was designed by the architect Sydney Smirke, opened in 1857. For almost 150 years researchers came here to consult the Museum's vast library. The Reading Room closed in 1997 when the national library (the British Library) moved to a new building at St Pancras. Today it has been transformed into the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Centre.\n\nWith the bookstacks in the central courtyard of the museum empty, the process of demolition for Lord Foster's glass-roofed Great Court could begin. The Great Court, opened in 2000, while undoubtedly improving circulation around the museum, was criticised for having a lack of exhibition space at a time when the museum was in serious financial difficulties and many galleries were closed to the public. At the same time the African collections that had been temporarily housed in 6 Burlington Gardens were given a new gallery in the North Wing funded by the Sainsbury family – with the donation valued at £25 million.\n\nAs part of its very large website, the museum has the largest online database of objects in the collection of any museum in the world, with 2,000,000 individual object entries, 650,000 of them illustrated, online at the start of 2012. There is also a \"Highlights\" database with longer entries on over 4,000 objects, and several specialised online research catalogues and online journals (all free to access). In 2013 the museum's website received 19.5 millions visits, an increase of 47% from the previous year.\n\nIn 2013 the museum received a record 6.7 million visitors, an increase of 20% from the previous year. Popular exhibitions including \"Life and Death in Pompeii and Herculaneum\" and \"Ice Age Art\" are credited with helping fuel the increase in visitors. Plans were announced in September 2014 to recreate the entire building along with all exhibits in the video game \"Minecraft\" in conjunction with members of the public.\n\nThe British Museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport through a three-year funding agreement. Its head is the Director. The British Museum was run from its inception by a 'Principal Librarian' (when the book collections were still part of the Museum), a role that was renamed 'Director and Principal Librarian' in 1898, and 'Director' in 1973 (on the separation of the British Library).\n\nA board of 25 trustees (with the Director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to Government) is responsible for the general management and control of the Museum, in accordance with the British Museum Act 1963 and the Museums and Galleries Act 1992. Prior to the 1963 Act, it was chaired by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor and the Speaker of the House of Commons. The board was formed on the Museum's inception to hold its collections in trust for the nation without actually owning them themselves, and now fulfil a mainly advisory role. Trustee appointments are governed by the regulatory framework set out in the code of practice on public appointments issued by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments.\n\nThe Greek Revival façade facing Great Russell Street is a characteristic building of Sir Robert Smirke, with 44 columns in the Ionic order high, closely based on those of the temple of Athena Polias at Priene in Asia Minor. The pediment over the main entrance is decorated by sculptures by Sir Richard Westmacott depicting \"The Progress of Civilisation\", consisting of fifteen allegorical figures, installed in 1852.\n\nThe construction commenced around the courtyard with the East Wing (The King's Library) in 1823–1828, followed by the North Wing in 1833–1838, which originally housed among other galleries a reading room, now the Wellcome Gallery. Work was also progressing on the northern half of the West Wing (The Egyptian Sculpture Gallery) 1826–1831, with Montagu House demolished in 1842 to make room for the final part of the West Wing, completed in 1846, and the South Wing with its great colonnade, initiated in 1843 and completed in 1847, when the Front Hall and Great Staircase were opened to the public. The Museum is faced with Portland stone, but the perimeter walls and other parts of the building were built using Haytor granite from Dartmoor in South Devon, transported via the unique Haytor Granite Tramway.\n\nIn 1846 Robert Smirke was replaced as the Museum's architect by his brother Sydney Smirke, whose major addition was the Round Reading Room 1854–1857; at in diameter it was then the second widest dome in the world, the Pantheon in Rome being slightly wider.\n\nThe next major addition was the White Wing 1882–1884 added behind the eastern end of the South Front, the architect being Sir John Taylor.\n\nIn 1895, Parliament gave the Museum Trustees a loan of £200,000 to purchase from the Duke of Bedford all 69 houses which backed onto the Museum building in the five surrounding streets – Great Russell Street, Montague Street, Montague Place, Bedford Square and Bloomsbury Street. The Trustees planned to demolish these houses and to build around the West, North and East sides of the Museum new galleries that would completely fill the block on which the Museum stands. The architect Sir John James Burnet was petitioned to put forward ambitious long-term plans to extend the building on all three sides. Most of the houses in Montague Place were knocked down a few years after the sale. Of this grand plan only the Edward VII galleries in the centre of the North Front were ever constructed, these were built 1906–14 to the design by J.J. Burnet, and opened by King George V and Queen Mary in 1914. They now house the Museum's collections of Prints and Drawings and Oriental Antiquities. There was not enough money to put up more new buildings, and so the houses in the other streets are nearly all still standing.\n\nThe Duveen Gallery, sited to the west of the Egyptian, Greek & Assyrian sculpture galleries, was designed to house the Elgin Marbles by the American Beaux-Arts architect John Russell Pope. Although completed in 1938, it was hit by a bomb in 1940 and remained semi-derelict for 22 years, before reopening in 1962. Other areas damaged during World War II bombing included: in September 1940 two unexploded bombs hit the Edward VII galleries, the King's Library received a direct hit from a high explosive bomb, incendiaries fell on the dome of the Round Reading Room but did little damage; on the night of 10 to 11 May 1941 several incendiaries fell on the south west corner of the Museum, destroying the book stack and 150,000 books in the courtyard and the galleries around the top of the Great Staircase – this damage was not fully repaired until the early 1960s.\n\nThe Queen Elizabeth II Great Court is a covered square at the centre of the British Museum designed by the engineers Buro Happold and the architects Foster and Partners. The Great Court opened in December 2000 and is the largest covered square in Europe. The roof is a glass and steel construction, built by an Austrian steelwork company, with 1,656 uniquely shaped panes of glass. At the centre of the Great Court is the Reading Room vacated by the British Library, its functions now moved to St Pancras. The Reading Room is open to any member of the public who wishes to read there.\n\nToday, the British Museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world, covering an area of over 92,000 m (990,000 sq. ft). In addition to 21,600 m (232,000 sq. ft) of on-site storage space, and 9,400 m (101,000 sq. ft) of external storage space. Altogether the British Museum showcases on public display less than 1% of its entire collection, approximately 50,000 items. There are nearly one hundred galleries open to the public, representing of exhibition space, although the less popular ones have restricted opening times. However, the lack of a large temporary exhibition space has led to the £135 million World Conservation and Exhibition Centre to provide one and to concentrate all the Museum's conservation facilities into one Conservation Centre. This project was announced in July 2007, with the architects Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners. It was granted planning permission in December 2009 and was completed in time for the Viking exhibition in March 2014.\n\nBlythe House in West Kensington is used by the Museum for off-site storage of small and medium-sized artefacts, and Franks House in East London is used for storage and work on the \"Early Prehistory\" – Palaeolithic and Mesolithic – and some other collections.\n\nThe British Museum houses the world's largest and most comprehensive collection of Egyptian antiquities (with over 100,000 pieces) outside the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. A collection of immense importance for its range and quality, it includes objects of all periods from virtually every site of importance in Egypt and the Sudan. Together, they illustrate every aspect of the cultures of the Nile Valley (including Nubia), from the Predynastic Neolithic period (c. 10,000 BC) through to the Coptic (Christian) times (12th century AD), a time-span over 11,000 years.\n\nEgyptian antiquities have formed part of the British Museum collection ever since its foundation in 1753 after receiving 160 Egyptian objects from Sir Hans Sloane. After the defeat of the forces under Napoleon at the Battle of the Nile in 1801, the Egyptian antiquities collected were confiscated by the British army and presented to the British Museum in 1803. These works, which included the famed Rosetta Stone, were the first important group of large sculptures to be acquired by the Museum. Thereafter, the UK appointed Henry Salt as consul in Egypt who amassed a huge collection of antiquities, some of which were assembled and transported with great ingenuity by the famous Italian explorer Giovanni Belzoni. Most of the antiquities Salt collected were purchased by the British Museum and the Musée du Louvre.\n\nBy 1866 the collection consisted of some 10,000 objects. Antiquities from excavations started to come to the museum in the latter part of the 19th century as a result of the work of the Egypt Exploration Fund under the efforts of E.A. Wallis Budge. Over the years more than 11,000 objects came from this source, including pieces from Amarna, Bubastis and Deir el-Bahari. Other organisations and individuals also excavated and donated objects to the British Museum, including Flinders Petrie's Egypt Research Account and the British School of Archaeology in Egypt, as well as the Oxford University Expedition to Kawa and Faras in Sudan.\nActive support by the museum for excavations in Egypt continued to result in important acquisitions throughout the 20th century until changes in antiquities laws in Egypt led to the suspension of policies allowing finds to be exported, although divisions still continue in Sudan. The British Museum conducted its own excavations in Egypt where it received divisions of finds, including Asyut (1907), Mostagedda and Matmar (1920s), Ashmunein (1980s) and sites in Sudan such as Soba, Kawa and the Northern Dongola Reach (1990s). The size of the Egyptian collections now stand at over 110,000 objects.\n\nIn autumn 2001 the eight million objects forming the Museum's permanent collection were further expanded by the addition of six million objects from the Wendorf Collection of Egyptian and Sudanese Prehistory. These were donated by Professor Fred Wendorf of Southern Methodist University in Texas, and comprise the entire collection of artefacts and environmental remains from his excavations at Prehistoric sites in the Sahara Desert between 1963 and 1997. Other fieldwork collections have recently come from Dietrich and Rosemarie Klemm (University of Munich) and William Adams (University of Kentucky).\n\nThe seven permanent Egyptian galleries at the British Museum, which include its largest exhibition space (Room 4, for monumental sculpture), can display only 4% of its Egyptian holdings. The second-floor galleries have a selection of the museum's collection of 140 mummies and coffins, the largest outside Cairo. A high proportion of the collection comes from tombs or contexts associated with the cult of the dead, and it is these pieces, in particular the mummies, that remain among the most eagerly sought after exhibits by visitors to the museum.\n\nKey highlights of the collections include:\n\nPredynastic and Early Dynastic period (c. 6000 BC – c. 2690 BC)\n\nOld Kingdom (2690–2181 BC)\n\nMiddle Kingdom (2134–1690 BC)\n\nNew Kingdom (1549–1069 BC)\n\nThird Intermediate Period (1069–664 BC)\n\nLate Period (664–332 BC)\n\nPtolemaic dynasty (305–30 BC)\n\nRoman Period (30 BC-641 AD)\n\nThe British Museum has one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of antiquities from the Classical world, with over 100,000 objects. These mostly range in date from the beginning of the Greek Bronze Age (about 3200 BC) to the establishment of Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, with the Edict of Milan under the reign of the Roman Emperor Constantine I in 313 AD. Archaeology was in its infancy during the nineteenth century and many pioneering individuals began excavating sites across the Classical world, chief among them for the museum were Charles Newton, John Turtle Wood, Robert Murdoch Smith and Charles Fellows.\n\nThe Greek objects originate from across the Ancient Greek world, from the mainland of Greece and the Aegean Islands, to neighbouring lands in Asia Minor and Egypt in the eastern Mediterranean and as far as the western lands of Magna Graecia that include Sicily and southern Italy. The Cycladic, Minoan and Mycenaean cultures are represented, and the Greek collection includes important sculpture from the Parthenon in Athens, as well as elements of two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesos.\n\nBeginning from the early Bronze Age, the department also houses one of the widest-ranging collections of Italic and Etruscan antiquities outside Italy, as well as extensive groups of material from Cyprus and non-Greek colonies in Lycia and Caria on Asia Minor. There is some material from the Roman Republic, but the collection's strength is in its comprehensive array of objects from across the Roman Empire, with the exception of Britain (which is the mainstay of the Department of Prehistory and Europe).\n\nThe collections of ancient jewellery and bronzes, Greek vases (many from graves in southern Italy that were once part of Sir William Hamilton's and Chevalier Durand's collections), Roman glass including the famous Cameo glass Portland Vase, Roman mosaics from Carthage and Utica in North Africa that were excavated by Nathan Davis, and silver hoards from Roman Gaul (some of which were bequeathed by the philanthropist and museum trustee Richard Payne Knight), are particularly important. Cypriot antiquities are strong too and have benefited from the purchase of Sir Robert Hamilton Lang's collection as well as the bequest of Emma Turner in 1892, which funded many excavations on the island. Roman sculptures (many of which are copies of Greek originals) are particularly well represented by the Townley collection as well as residual sculptures from the famous Farnese collection.\n\nObjects from the Department of Greece and Rome are located throughout the museum, although many of the architectural monuments are to be found on the ground floor, with connecting galleries from Gallery 5 to Gallery 23. On the upper floor, there are galleries devoted to smaller material from ancient Italy, Greece, Cyprus and the Roman Empire.\n\nKey highlights of the collections include:\n\nParthenon\n\nErechtheion\n\nTemple of Athena Nike\n\nTemple of Bassae\n\nMausoleum at Halicarnassus\n\nTemple of Artemis in Ephesus\n\nKnidos in Asia Minor\n\nXanthos in Asia Minor\n\nWider Collection\n\nPrehistoric Greece and Italy (3300 BC – 8th century BC)\n\nEtruscan (8th century BC – 1st century BC)\n\nAncient Greece (8th century BC – 4th century AD)\n\nAncient Rome (1st century BC – 4th century AD)\n\nWith a collection numbering some 330,000 works, the British Museum possesses the world's largest and most important collection of Mesopotamian antiquities outside Iraq. A collection of immense importance, the holdings of Assyrian sculpture, Babylonian and Sumerian antiquities are among the most comprehensive in the world with entire suites of rooms panelled in alabaster Assyrian palace reliefs from Nimrud, Nineveh and Khorsabad.\n\nThe collections represent the civilisations of the ancient Near East and its adjacent areas. These cover Mesopotamia, Persia, the Arabian Peninsula, Anatolia, the Caucasus, parts of Central Asia, Syria, the Holy Land and Phoenician settlements in the western Mediterranean from the prehistoric period and include objects from the beginning of Islam in the 7th century.\n\nThe first significant addition of Mesopotamian objects was from the collection of Claudius James Rich in 1825. The collection was later dramatically enlarged by the excavations of A. H. Layard at the Assyrian sites of Nimrud and Nineveh between 1845 and 1851. At Nimrud, Layard discovered the North-West Palace of Ashurnasirpal II, as well as three other palaces and various temples. He later uncovered the Palace of Sennacherib at Nineveh with 'no less than seventy-one halls'. As a result, a large numbers of Lamassu's, palace reliefs, stelae, including the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, were brought to the British Museum.\n\nLayard's work was continued by his assistant, Hormuzd Rassam and in 1852–1854 he went on to discover the North Palace of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh with many magnificent reliefs, including the famous \"Lion Hunt of Ashurbanipal\" and Lachish reliefs. He also discovered the Royal Library of Ashurbanipal, a large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance that today number around 130,000 pieces. W. K. Loftus excavated in Nimrud between 1850 and 1855 and found a remarkable hoard of ivories in the Burnt Palace. Between 1878 and 1882 Rassam greatly improved the Museum's holdings with exquisite objects including the Cyrus Cylinder from Babylon, the bronze gates from Balawat, important objects from Sippar, and a fine collection of Urartian bronzes from Toprakkale.\n\nIn the early 20th century excavations were carried out at Carchemish, Turkey by D. G. Hogarth and Leonard Woolley, the latter assisted by T. E. Lawrence. The Mesopotamian collections were greatly augmented by excavations in southern Iraq after the First World War. From Tell al-Ubaid came the bronze furnishings of a Sumerian temple, including life-sized lions and a panel featuring the lion-headed eagle Indugud found by H. R. Hall in 1919–24. Woolley went onto to excavate Ur between 1922 and 1934, discovering the 'Royal Cemeteries' of the 3rd millennium BC. Some of the masterpieces include the 'Standard of Ur', the 'Ram in a Thicket', the 'Royal Game of Ur', and two bull-headed lyres. The department also has three diorite statues of the ruler Gudea from the ancient state of Lagash and a series of limestone kudurru or boundary stones from different locations across ancient Mesopotamia.\n\nAlthough the collections centre on Mesopotamia, most of the surrounding areas are well represented. The Achaemenid collection was enhanced with the addition of the Oxus Treasure in 1897 and objects excavated by the German scholar Ernst Herzfeld and the Hungarian-British explorer Sir Aurel Stein. Reliefs and sculptures from the site of Persepolis were donated by Sir Gore Ouseley in 1825 and the 5th Earl of Aberdeen in 1861. Moreover, the museum has been able to acquire one of the greatest assemblages of Achaemenid silverware in the world. The later Sasanian Empire is also well represented by ornate silver plates and cups, many representing ruling monarchs hunting lions and deer. Phoenician antiquities come from across the region, but the Tharros collection from Sardinia and the large number of Phoenician stelae from Carthage are outstanding. Another often overlooked highlight is Yemeni antiquities, the finest collection outside that country. Furthermore, the museum has a representative collection of Dilmun and Parthian material excavated from various burial mounds at the ancient sites of A'ali and Shakhura in Bahrain.\n\nFrom the modern state of Syria come almost forty funerary busts from Palmyra and a group of stone reliefs from the excavations of Max von Oppenheim at Tell Halaf that was purchased in 1920. More material followed from the excavations of Max Mallowan at Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak in 1935–1938 and from Woolley at Alalakh in the years just before and after the Second World War. Mallowan returned with his wife Agatha Christie to carry out further digs at Nimrud in the postwar period which secured many important artefacts for the museum. The collection of Palestinian material was strengthened by the work of Kathleen Kenyon at Jericho in the 1950s and the acquisition in 1980 of around 17,000 objects found at Lachish by the Wellcome-Marston expedition of 1932–1938. Archaeological digs are still taking place where permitted in the Middle East, and, depending on the country, the museum continues to receive a share of the finds from sites such as in Jordan.\n\nThe museum's collection of Islamic art, including archaeological material, numbers about 40,000 objects, one of the largest of its kind in the world. As such, it contains a broad range of pottery, paintings, tiles, metalwork, glass, seals, and inscriptions from across the Islamic world, from Spain in the west to India in the east. It is particularly famous for its collection of Iznik ceramics (the largest in the world), a highlight of which is the mosque lamp from the Dome of the Rock, mediaeval metalwork such as the Vaso Vescovali with its depictions of the Zodiac, a fine selection of astrolabes, and Mughal paintings and precious artwork including a large jade terrapin made for the Emperor Jahangir. Thousands of objects were excavated after the war by professional archaeologists at Iranian sites such as Siraf by David Whitehouse and Alamut Castle by Peter Willey. The collection was augmented in 1983 by the Godman bequest of Iznik, Hispano-Moresque and early Iranian pottery. Artefacts from the Islamic world are on display in Gallery 34 of the museum.\n\nA representative selection from the Department of Middle East, including the most important pieces, are on display in 13 galleries throughout the museum and total some 4,500 objects. A whole suite of rooms on the ground floor display the sculptured reliefs from the Assyrian palaces at Nineveh, Nimrud and Khorsabad, while 8 galleries on the upper floor hold smaller material from ancient sites across the Middle East. The remainder form the study collection which ranges in size from beads to large sculptures. They include approximately 130,000 cuneiform tablets from Mesopotamia.\n\nKey highlights of the collections include:\n\nNimrud:\nAssyrian palace reliefs from:\n\nSculptures:\n\nAssyrian palace reliefs and sculptures from:\n\nRoyal Library of Ashurbanipal:\n\n\n\n\nThe Department of Prints and Drawings holds the national collection of Western prints and drawings. It ranks as one of the largest and best print room collections in existence alongside the Albertina in Vienna, the Paris collections and the Hermitage. The holdings are easily accessible to the general public in the Study Room, unlike many such collections. The department also has its own exhibition gallery in Room 90, where the displays and exhibitions change several times a year.\n\nSince its foundation in 1808, the prints and drawings collection has grown to international renown as one of the richest and most representative collections in the world. There are approximately 50,000 drawings and over two million prints. The collection of drawings covers the period from the 14th century to the present, and includes many works of the highest quality by the leading artists of the European schools. The collection of prints covers the tradition of fine printmaking from its beginnings in the 15th century up to the present, with near complete holdings of most of the great names before the 19th century. Key benefactors to the department have been Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode, Richard Payne Knight, John Malcolm, Campbell Dodgson, César Mange de Hauke and Tomás Harris.\n\nThere are groups of drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, (including his only surviving full-scale cartoon), Dürer (a collection of 138 drawings is one of the finest in existence), Peter Paul Rubens, Rembrandt, Claude and Watteau, and largely complete collections of the works of all the great printmakers including Dürer (99 engravings, 6 etchings and most of his 346 woodcuts), Rembrandt and Goya. More than 30,000 British drawings and watercolours include important examples of work by Hogarth, Sandby, Turner, Girtin, Constable, Cotman, Cox, Gillray, Rowlandson and Cruikshank, as well as all the great Victorians. There are about a million British prints including more than 20,000 satires and outstanding collections of works by William Blake and Thomas Bewick.. The great eleven volume Catalogue of Political and Personal Satires Preserved in the Department of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum compiled between 1870 and 1954 is the definitive reference work for the study of British Satirical prints. Over 500,000 objects from the department are now on the online collection database, many with high quality images. A 2011 donation of £1 million enabled the museum to acquire a complete set of Pablo Picasso's \"Vollard Suite\".\n\nThe Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory was established in 1969 and is responsible for collections that cover a vast expanse of time and geography. It includes some of the earliest objects made by humans in east Africa over 2 million years ago, as well as Prehistoric and neolithic objects from other parts of the world; and the art and archaeology of Europe from the earliest times to the present day. Archeological excavation of prehistoric material took off and expanded considerably in the twentieth century and the department now has literally millions of objects from the Paleolithic and Mesolithic periods throughout the world, as well as from the Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron age in Europe. Stone Age material from Africa has been donated by famous archaeologists such as Louis and Mary Leakey, and Gertrude Caton–Thompson. Paleolithic objects from the Sturge, Christy and Lartet collections include some of the earliest works of art from Europe. Many Bronze Age objects from across Europe were added during the nineteenth century, often from large collections built up by excavators and scholars such as Greenwell in Britain, Tobin and Cooke in Ireland, Lukis and de la Grancière in Brittany, Worsaae in Denmark, Siret at El Argar in Spain, and Klemm and Edelmann in Germany. A representative selection of Iron Age artefacts from Hallstatt were acquired as a result of the Evans/Lubbock excavations and from Giubiasco in Ticino through the Swiss National Museum.\n\nIn addition, the British Museum's collections covering the period AD 300 to 1100 are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world, extending from Spain to the Black Sea and from North Africa to Scandinavia; a representative selection of these has recently been redisplayed in a newly refurbished gallery. Important collections include Latvian, Norwegian, Gotlandic and Merovingian material from Johann Karl Bähr, Alfred Heneage Cocks, Sir James Curle and Philippe Delamain respectively. However, the undoubted highlight from the early mediaeval period are the magnificent items from the Sutton Hoo royal grave, generously donated to the nation by the landowner Edith Pretty. The department includes the national collection of horology with one of the most wide-ranging assemblage of clocks, watches and other timepieces in Europe, with masterpieces from every period in the development of time-keeping. Choice horological pieces came from the Morgan and Ilbert collections. The department is also responsible for the curation of Romano-British objects – the museum has by far the most extensive such collection in Britain and one of the most representative regional collections in Europe outside Italy. It is particularly famous for the large number of late Roman silver treasures, many of which were found in East Anglia, the most important of which is the Mildenhall Treasure. The museum purchased many Roman-British objects from the antiquarian Charles Roach Smith in 1856. These quickly formed the nucleus of the collection.\n\nObjects from the Department of Prehistory and Europe are mostly found on the upper floor of the museum, with a suite of galleries numbered from 38 to 51. Most of the collection is stored in its archive facilities, where it is available for research and study.\n\nKey highlights of the collections include:\n\nStone Age (c. 3.4 million years BC – c. 2000 BC)\n\nBronze Age (c. 3300 BC – c. 600 BC)\n\nIron Age (c. 600 BC – c. 1st century AD)\n\nRomano-British (43 AD – 410 AD)\n\nEarly Mediaeval (c. 4th century AD – c. 1000 AD)\n\nMediaeval (c. 1000 AD – c. 1500 AD)\n\nRenaissance to Modern (c. 1500 AD – present)\n\nThe many hoards of treasure include those of Mildenhall, Esquiline, Carthage, First Cyprus, Lampsacus, Water Newton, Hoxne, and Vale of York, (4th–10th centuries AD)\n\nThe scope of the Department of Asia is extremely broad; its collections of over 75,000 objects cover the material culture of the whole Asian continent (from East, South, Central and South-East Asia) and from the Neolithic up to the present day. Until recently, this department concentrated on collecting Oriental antiquities from urban or semi-urban societies across the Asian continent. Many of those objects were collected by colonial officers and explorers in former parts of the British Empire, especially the Indian subcontinent. Examples include the collections made by individuals such as Charles Stuart, James Prinsep, Charles Masson, Sir Alexander Cunningham, Sir Harold Deane and Sir John Marshall. A large number of Chinese antiquities were purchased from the Anglo-Greek banker George Eumorfopoulos in the 1930s. In the second half of the twentieth century, the museum greatly benefited from the bequest of the philanthropist PT Brooke Sewell, which allowed the department to purchase many objects and fill in gaps in the collection.\n\nIn 2004, the ethnographic collections from Asia were transferred to the department. These reflect the diverse environment of the largest continent in the world and range from India to China, the Middle East to Japan. Much of the ethnographic material comes from objects originally owned by tribal cultures and hunter-gatherers, many of whose way of life has disappeared in the last century. Particularly valuable collections are from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (much assembled by the British naval officer Maurice Portman), Sri Lanka (especially through the colonial administrator Hugh Nevill), Northern Thailand, south-west China, the Ainu of Hokaidu in Japan (chief among them the collection of the Scottish zoologist John Anderson), Siberia and the islands of South-East Asia, especially Borneo. The latter benefited from the purchase in 1905 of the Sarawak collection put together by Dr Charles Hose, as well as from other colonial officers such as Edward A Jeffreys. In addition, a unique and valuable group of objects from Java, including shadow puppets and a gamelan musical set, was assembled by Sir Stamford Raffles.\n\nThe principal gallery devoted to Asian art in the museum is Gallery 33 with its comprehensive display of Chinese, Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asian objects. An adjacent gallery showcases the Amaravati sculptures and monuments. Other galleries on the upper floors are devoted to its Japanese, Korean, painting and calligraphy, and Chinese ceramics collections.\n\nKey highlights of the collections include:\n\n\nEast Asia\n\nSouth Asia\n\nSouth-east Asia\n\nThe British Museum houses one of the world's most comprehensive collections of Ethnographic material from Africa, Oceania and the Americas, representing the cultures of indigenous peoples throughout the world. Over 350,000 objects spanning thousands of years tells the history of mankind from three major continents and many rich and diverse cultures; the collecting of modern artefacts is ongoing. Many individuals have added to the department's collection over the years but those assembled by Henry Christy, Harry Beasley and William Oldman are outstanding. Objects from this department are mostly on display in several galleries on the ground and lower floors. Gallery 24 displays ethnographic from every continent while adjacent galleries focus on North America and Mexico. A long suite of rooms (Gallery 25) on the lower floor display African art. There are plans in place to develop permanent galleries for showcasing art from Oceania and South America.\n\nAfrica\n\nThe Sainsbury African Galleries display 600 objects from the greatest permanent collection of African arts and culture in the world. The three permanent galleries provide a substantial exhibition space for the Museum's African collection comprising over 200,000 objects. A curatorial scope that encompasses both archaeological and contemporary material, including both unique masterpieces of artistry and objects of everyday life. A great addition was material amassed by Sir Henry Wellcome, which was donated by the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum in 1954. Highlights of the African collection include objects found at megalithic circles in The Gambia, a dozen exquisite Afro-Portuguese ivories, a series of soapstone figures from the Kissi people in Sierra Leone and Liberia, Asante goldwork and regalia from Ghana including the Bowdich collection, the rare Akan Drum from the same region in west Africa, the Benin and Igbo-Ukwu bronze sculptures, the beautiful Bronze Head of Queen Idia, a magnificent brass head of a Yoruba ruler and quartz throne from Ife, a similar terracotta head from Iwinrin Grove near Ife, the Apapa Hoard from Lagos, southern Nigeria, an Ikom monolith from Cross River State, the Torday collection of central African sculpture, textiles and weaponry from the Kuba Kingdom including three royal figures, the unique Luzira Head from Uganda, processional crosses and other ecclesiastical and royal material from Gondar and Magdala, Ethiopia following the British Expedition to Abyssinia, excavated objects from Great Zimbabwe (that includes a unique soapstone, anthropomorphic figure) and satellite towns such as Mutare including a large hoard of Iron Age soapstone figures, a rare divining bowl from the Venda peoples and cave paintings and petroglyphs from South Africa.\n\nOceania\n\nThe British Museum's Oceanic collections originate from the vast area of the Pacific Ocean, stretching from Papua New Guinea to Easter Island, from New Zealand to Hawaii. The three main anthropological groups represented in the collection are Polynesia, Melanesia and Micronesia – Aboriginal art from Australia is considered separately in its own right. Metal working was not indigenous to Oceania before Europeans arrived, so many of the artefacts from the collection are made from stone, shell, bone and bamboo. Prehistoric objects from the region include a bird-shaped pestle and a group of stone mortars from Papua New Guinea. The British Museum is fortunate in having some of the earliest Oceanic and Pacific collections, many of which were put together by members of Cook's and Vancouver's expeditions or by colonial administrators such as Sir George Grey, Sir Frederick Broome and Arthur Gordon, before Western culture significantly impacted on indigenous cultures. The Wilson cabinet of curiosities from Palau is another example of pre-contact ware. The department has also benefited greatly from the legacy of pioneering anthropologists such as Bronisław Malinowski and Katherine Routledge. In addition, the Māori collection is the finest outside New Zealand with many intricately carved wooden and jade objects and the Aboriginal art collection is distinguished by its wide range of bark paintings, including two very early bark etchings collected by John Hunter Kerr. A poignant artefact is the wooden shield found near Botany Bay during Cook's first voyage in 1770. A particularly important group of objects was purchased from the London Missionary Society in 1911, that includes the unique statue of A'a from Rurutu Island, the rare idol from the isle of Mangareva and the Cook Islands deity figure. Other highlights include the huge Hawaiian statue of Kū-ka-ili-moku or god of war (one of three extant in the world) and the famous Easter Island statues Hoa Hakananai'a and Moai Hava.\n\nAmericas\n\nThe Americas collection mainly consists of 19th and 20th century items although the Paracas, Moche, Inca, Maya, Aztec, Taino and other early cultures are well represented. The Kayung totem pole, which was made in the late nineteenth century in the Queen Charlotte Islands, dominates the Great Court and provides a fitting introduction to this very wide-ranging collections that stretches from the very north of the North American continent where the Inuit population has lived for centuries, to the tip of South America where indigenous tribes have long thrived in Patagonia. Highlights of the collection include Aboriginal Canadian objects from Alaska and Canada collected by the 5th Earl of Lonsdale and the Marquis of Lorne, the Squier and Davis collection of prehistoric mound relics from North America, a selection of pottery vessels found in cliff-dwellings at Mesa Verde, a collection of turquoise Aztec mosaics from Mexico (the largest in Europe), important artefacts from Teotihuacan and Isla de Sacrificios, several rare pre-Columbian manuscripts including the Codex Zouche-Nuttall and Codex Waecker-Gotter, a spectacular series of Mayan lintels from Yaxchilan excavated by the British Mayanist Alfred Maudslay, a very high quality Mayan collection that includes sculptures from Copan, Tikal, Tulum, Pusilha, Naranjo and Nebaj (including the celebrated Fenton Vase), a group of Zemi Figures from Vere, Jamaica, a number of prestigious pre-Columbian gold and votive objects from Colombia, ethnographic objects from across the Amazon region including the Schomburgk collection, two rare Tiwanaku pottery vessels from Lake Titicaca and important items from Tierra del Fuego donated by Commander Phillip Parker King.\n\nThe British Museum is home to one of the world's finest numismatic collections, comprising about a million objects, including coins, medals, tokens and paper money. The collection spans the entire history of coinage from its origins in the 7th century BC to the present day and is representative of both the East and West. The Department of Coins and Medals was created in 1861 and celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2011.\n\nThis department was founded in 1920. Conservation has six specialist areas: ceramics & glass; metals; organic material (including textiles); stone, wall paintings and mosaics; Eastern pictorial art and Western pictorial art. The science department has and continues to develop techniques to date artefacts, analyse and identify the materials used in their manufacture, to identify the place an artefact originated and the techniques used in their creation. The department also publishes its findings and discoveries.\n\nThis department covers all levels of education, from casual visitors, schools, degree level and beyond. The Museum's various libraries hold in excess of 350,000 books, journals and pamphlets covering all areas of the museum's collection. Also the general Museum archives which date from its foundation in 1753 are overseen by this department; the individual departments have their own separate archives and libraries covering their various areas of responsibility, which can be consulted by the public on application. The Anthropology Library is especially large, with 120,000 volumes. However, the Paul Hamlyn Library, which had become the central reference library of the British Museum and the only library there freely open to the general public, closed permanently in August 2011. The website and online database of the collection also provide increasing amounts of information.\n\nThe British Museum Press (BMP) is the publishing business and a division of the British Museum Company Ltd, a company and a charity (established in 1973) wholly owned by the Trustees of the British Museum.\n\nThe BMP publishes both popular and scholarly illustrated books to accompany the exhibition programme and explore aspects of the general collection. Profits from their sales goes to support the British Museum.\n\nScholarly titles are published in the Research Publications series, all of which are peer-reviewed. This series was started in 1978 and was originally called Occasional Papers. The series is designed to disseminate research on items in the collection. Between six and eight titles are published each year in this series.\n\nIt is a point of controversy whether museums should be allowed to possess artifacts taken from other countries, and the British Museum is a notable target for criticism. The Elgin Marbles, Benin Bronzes and the Rosetta Stone are among the most disputed objects in its collections, and organisations have been formed demanding the return of these artefacts to their native countries of Greece, Nigeria and Egypt respectively. Parthenon Marbles claimed by Greece were also claimed by UNESCO among others for restitution. From 1801 to 1812, Elgin's agents took about half of the surviving sculptures of the Parthenon, as well as sculptures from the Propylaea and Erechtheum.\n\nIn recent years, controversies pertaining to reparation of artefacts taken from the Old Summer Palace in Beijing during the Anglo-French invasion of China in 1860 have also begun to surface. The ransacking and destruction of the Chinese palaces has led to unhealed historical wounds in Chinese culture. Victor Hugo condemned the French and British for their plundering. The British Museum and the Victoria & Albert Museum, among others, have been asked since 2009 to open their archives for investigation by a team of Chinese investigators as a part of an international mission to document lost national treasures. However, there have been fears that the United Kingdom may be asked to return these treasures. , Neil MacGregor, the Director of the British Museum, said he hoped that both British and Chinese investigators would work together on the controversial collection, which continues to result in resentment in China.\n\nThe British Museum has refused to return these artefacts, stating that the \"restitutionist premise, that whatever was made in a country must return to an original geographical site, would empty both the British Museum and the other great museums of the world\". The Museum has also argued that the British Museum Act of 1963 legally prevents any object from leaving its collection once it has entered it. Nevertheless, it has returned items such as the Tasmanian Ashes after a 20-year-long battle with Australia.\n\nThe British Museum continues to assert that it is an appropriate custodian and has an inalienable right to its disputed artefacts under British law.\n\nIn 2016, The British Museum moved its bag searches to marquees in the front courtyard and beside the rear entrance. This has been criticised by heritage groups as out-of-character with the historic building. The British Museum clarified that the change was purely logistical to save space in the main museum entrance and did not reflect any escalation in threat.\n\n\n\"Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan\"\n\"Department of the Middle East\"\n\"Department of Greece and Rome\"\n\"Forgotten Empire Exhibition (October 2005 – January 2006)\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4676", "title": "Bloody Sunday", "text": "Bloody Sunday\n\nBloody Sunday may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4677", "title": "Binomial theorem", "text": "Binomial theorem\n\nIn elementary algebra, the binomial theorem (or binomial expansion) describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial. According to the theorem, it is possible to expand the polynomial into a sum involving terms of the form , where the exponents and are nonnegative integers with , and the coefficient of each term is a specific positive integer depending on and . For example,\n\nThe coefficient in the term of is known as the binomial coefficient formula_2 or formula_3 (the two have the same value). These coefficients for varying and can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle. These numbers also arise in combinatorics, where formula_2 gives the number of different combinations of elements that can be chosen from an -element set.\n\nSpecial cases of the binomial theorem were known from ancient times. The 4th century B.C. Greek mathematician Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent 2. There is evidence that the binomial theorem for cubes was known by the 6th century in India.\n\nBinomial coefficients, as combinatorial quantities expressing the number of ways of selecting \"k\" objects out of \"n\" without replacement, were of interest to the ancient Hindus. The earliest known reference to this combinatorial problem is the \"Chandaḥśāstra\" by the Hindu lyricist Pingala (c. 200 B.C.), which contains a method for its solution. The commentator Halayudha from the 10th century A.D. explains this method using what is now known as Pascal's triangle. By the 6th century A.D., the Hindu mathematicians probably knew how to express this as a quotient formula_5, and a clear statement of this rule can be found in the 12th century text \"Lilavati\" by Bhaskara.\n\nThe binomial theorem as such can be found in the work of 11th-century Persian mathematician Al-Karaji, who described the triangular pattern of the binomial coefficients. He also provided a mathematical proof of both the binomial theorem and Pascal's triangle, using a primitive form of mathematical induction. The Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam was probably familiar with the formula to higher orders, although many of his mathematical works are lost. The binomial expansions of small degrees were known in the 13th century mathematical works of Yang Hui and also Chu Shih-Chieh. Yang Hui attributes the method to a much earlier 11th century text of Jia Xian, although those writings are now also lost.\n\nIn 1544, Michael Stifel introduced the term \"binomial coefficient\" and showed how to use them to express formula_6 in terms of formula_7, via \"Pascal's triangle\". Blaise Pascal studied the eponymous triangle comprehensively in the treatise \"Traité du triangle arithmétique\" (1653). However, the pattern of numbers was already known to the European mathematicians of the late Renaissance, including Stifel, Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, and Simon Stevin.\n\nIsaac Newton is generally credited with the generalized binomial theorem, valid for any rational exponent.\n\nAccording to the theorem, it is possible\nto expand any power of \"x\" + \"y\" into a sum of the form\nwhere each formula_9 is a specific positive integer known as a binomial coefficient. (When an exponent is zero, the corresponding power expression is taken to be 1 and this multiplicative factor is often omitted from the term. Hence one often sees the right side written as formula_10.) This formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity. Using summation notation, it can be written as\nThe final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of \"x\" and \"y\" in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetrical.\nA simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting 1 for \"y\", so that it involves only a single variable. In this form, the formula reads\nor equivalently\n\nThe most basic example of the binomial theorem is the formula for the square of :\n\nThe binomial coefficients 1, 2, 1 appearing in this expansion correspond to the second row of Pascal's triangle. (Note that the top \"1\" of the triangle is considered to be row 0, by convention.) The coefficients of higher powers of correspond to lower rows of the triangle:\n\nSeveral patterns can be observed from these examples. In general, for the expansion :\n\nThe binomial theorem can be applied to the powers of any binomial. For example,\n\nFor a binomial involving subtraction, the theorem can be applied by using the form . This has the effect of changing the sign of every other term in the expansion:\n\nFor positive values of \"a\" and \"b\", the binomial theorem with \"n\" = 2 is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side can be cut into a square of side \"a\", a square of side \"b\", and two rectangles with sides \"a\" and \"b\". With \"n\" = 3, the theorem states that a cube of side can be cut into a cube of side \"a\", a cube of side \"b\", three \"a\"×\"a\"×\"b\" rectangular boxes, and three \"a\"×\"b\"×\"b\" rectangular boxes.\n\nIn calculus, this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative formula_18 if one sets formula_19 and formula_20 interpreting \"b\" as an infinitesimal change in \"a,\" then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an \"n\"-dimensional hypercube, formula_21 where the coefficient of the linear term (in formula_22) is formula_23 the area of the \"n\" faces, each of dimension formula_24\nSubstituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms, formula_26 and higher, become negligible, and yields the formula formula_27 interpreted as\nIf one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus, one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula, the integral formula_29 – see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details.\n\nThe coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients. These are usually written formula_9, and pronounced “\"n\" choose \"k\"”.\n\nThe coefficient of \"x\"\"y\" is given by the formula\n\nwhich is defined in terms of the factorial function \"n\"!. Equivalently, this formula can be written\n\nwith \"k\" factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction. Note that, although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient formula_9 is actually an integer.\n\nThe binomial coefficient formula_9 can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose \"k\" elements from an \"n\"-element set. This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write (\"x\" + \"y\") as a product\nthen, according to the distributive law, there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either \"x\" or \"y\" from each of the binomials of the product. For example, there will only be one term \"x\", corresponding to choosing \"x\" from each binomial. However, there will be several terms of the form \"x\"\"y\", one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a \"y\". Therefore, after combining like terms, the coefficient of \"x\"\"y\" will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly 2 elements from an \"n\"-element set.\n\nThe coefficient of \"xy\" in\n\nequals formula_37 because there are three \"x\",\"y\" strings of length 3 with exactly two \"y\"'s, namely,\n\ncorresponding to the three 2-element subsets of { 1, 2, 3 }, namely,\n\nwhere each subset specifies the positions of the \"y\" in a corresponding string.\n\nExpanding (\"x\" + \"y\") yields the sum of the 2 products of the form \"e\"\"e\" ... \"e\" where each \"e\" is \"x\" or \"y\". Rearranging factors shows that each product equals \"x\"\"y\" for some \"k\" between 0 and \"n\". For a given \"k\", the following are proved equal in succession:\nThis proves the binomial theorem.\n\nInduction yields another proof of the binomial theorem. When \"n\" = 0, both sides equal 1, since \"x\" = 1 and formula_43.\nNow suppose that the equality holds for a given \"n\"; we will prove it for \"n\" + 1.\nFor \"j\", \"k\" ≥ 0, let [\"ƒ\"(\"x\", \"y\")] denote the coefficient of \"x\"\"y\" in the polynomial \"ƒ\"(\"x\", \"y\").\nBy the inductive hypothesis, (\"x\" + \"y\") is a polynomial in \"x\" and \"y\" such that [(\"x\" + \"y\")] is formula_44 if \"j\" + \"k\" = \"n\", and 0 otherwise.\nThe identity\n\nshows that (\"x\" + \"y\") also is a polynomial in \"x\" and \"y\", and\n\nsince if \"j\" + \"k\" = \"n\" + 1, then (\"j\" − 1) + \"k\" = \"n\" and \"j\" + (\"k\" − 1) = \"n\". Now, the right hand side is\n\nby Pascal's identity. On the other hand, if \"j\" +\"k\" ≠ \"n\" + 1, then (\"j\" – 1) + \"k\" ≠ \"n\" and \"j\" +(\"k\" – 1) ≠ \"n\", so we get 0 + 0 = 0. Thus\n\nwhich is the inductive hypothesis with \"n\" + 1 substituted for \"n\" and so completes the inductive step.\n\nAround 1665, Isaac Newton generalized the binomial theorem to allow real exponents other than nonnegative integers. (The same generalization also applies to complex exponents.) In this generalization, the finite sum is replaced by an infinite series. In order to do this, one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the usual formula with factorials. However, for an arbitrary number \"r\", one can define\n\nwhere formula_50 is the Pochhammer symbol, here standing for a falling factorial. This agrees with the usual definitions when \"r\" is a nonnegative integer. Then, if \"x\" and \"y\" are real numbers with |\"x\"| > |\"y\"|, and \"r\" is any complex number, one has\n\nWhen \"r\" is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for \"k\" > \"r\" are zero, so this equation reduces to the usual binomial theorem, and there are at most \"r\" + 1 nonzero terms. For other values of \"r\", the series typically has infinitely many nonzero terms.\n\nFor example, with \"r\" = 1/2 gives the following series for the square root:\n\nTaking formula_53, the generalized binomial series gives the geometric series formula, valid for formula_54:\n\nMore generally, with \"r\" = −\"s\":\n\nSo, for instance, when formula_57,\n\nThe generalized binomial theorem can be extended to the case where \"x\" and \"y\" are complex numbers. For this version, one should again assume |\"x\"| > |\"y\"| and define the powers of \"x\" + \"y\" and \"x\" using a holomorphic branch of log defined on an open disk of radius |\"x\"| centered at \"x\".\n\nThe generalized binomial theorem is valid also for elements \"x\" and \"y\" of a Banach algebra as long as \"xy\" = \"yx\", \"x\" is invertible, and ||\"y/x\"|| < 1.\n\nThe binomial theorem can be generalized to include powers of sums with more than two terms. The general version is\n\nwhere the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices \"k\" through \"k\" such that the sum of all \"k\" is \"n\". (For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to \"n\"). The coefficients formula_60 are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula\n\nCombinatorially, the multinomial coefficient formula_62 counts the number of different ways to partition an \"n\"-element set into disjoint subsets of sizes \"k\", ..., \"k\".\n\nIt is often useful when working in more dimensions, to deal with products of binomial expressions. By the binomial theorem this is equal to\n\nThis may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation, as\n\nFor the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with De Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine. According to De Moivre's formula,\n\nUsing the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for cos(\"nx\") and sin(\"nx\"). For example, since\nDe Moivre's formula tells us that\nwhich are the usual double-angle identities. Similarly, since\nDe Moivre's formula yields\nIn general,\nand\n\nThe number \"e\" is often defined by the formula\n\nApplying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for \"e\". In particular:\n\nThe \"k\"th term of this sum is\n\nAs \"n\" → ∞, the rational expression on the right approaches one, and therefore\n\nThis indicates that \"e\" can be written as a series:\n\nIndeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of \"n\", it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to \"e\".\n\nIn finding the derivative of the power function \"f\"(\"x\") = \"x\" for integer \"n\" using the definition of derivative, one can expand the binomial (\"x\" + \"h\").\n\nTo indicate the formula for the derivative of order \"n\" of the product of two functions, the formula of the binomial theorem is used symbolically.\n\nThe binomial theorem is closely related to the probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution. The probability of a (countable) collection of independent Bernoulli trials formula_77 with probability of success formula_78 all not happening is formula_79A useful upper bound for this quantity is formula_80. \n\nFormula (1) is valid more generally for any elements \"x\" and \"y\" of a semiring satisfying \"xy\" = \"yx\". The theorem is true even more generally: alternativity suffices in place of associativity.\n\nThe binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence { 1, \"x\", \"x\", \"x\", ... } is of binomial type.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4680", "title": "Balboa", "text": "Balboa\n\nBalboa may refer to:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4681", "title": "Boxing Day", "text": "Boxing Day\n\nBoxing Day is a holiday celebrated the day after Christmas Day. It originated in the United Kingdom, and is celebrated in a number of countries that previously formed part of the British Empire. Boxing Day is on 26 December, although the attached bank holiday or public holiday may take place either on that day or two days later.\n\nIn the liturgical calendar of Western Christianity, Boxing Day is the second day of Christmastide, and also St. Stephen's Day. In some European countries, notably Germany, Poland, Belgium, the Netherlands and the Nordic countries, 26 December is celebrated as a Second Christmas Day.\n\nThere are competing theories for the origins of the term, none of which is definitive. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives the earliest attestations from Britain in the 1830s, defining it as \"the first week-day after Christmas-day, observed as a holiday on which post-men, errand-boys, and servants of various kinds expect to receive a Christmas-box\".\n\nThe term \"Christmas-box\" dates back to the 17th century, and among other things meant:\n\nA present or gratuity given at Christmas: in Great Britain, usually confined to gratuities given to those who are supposed to have a vague claim upon the donor for services rendered to him as one of the general public by whom they are employed and paid, or as a customer of their legal employer; the undefined theory being that as they have done offices for this person, for which he has not directly paid them, some direct acknowledgement is becoming at Christmas.\n\nIn Britain, it was a custom for tradespeople to collect \"Christmas boxes\" of money or presents on the first weekday after Christmas as thanks for good service throughout the year. This is mentioned in Samuel Pepys' diary entry for 19 December 1663. This custom is linked to an older British tradition: since they would have to wait on their masters on Christmas Day, the servants of the wealthy were allowed the next day to visit their families. The employers would give each servant a box to take home containing gifts, bonuses, and sometimes leftover food.\n\nIn South Africa (a former British colony) as recently as the 1980s, milkmen and garbage collectors, who normally had little if any interaction with those they served, were accustomed to knock on their doors asking for a \"Christmas box\", being a small cash donation, in the week or so before and after Christmas.\n\nThe European tradition, which has long included giving money and other gifts to those who were needy and in service positions, has been dated to the Middle Ages, but the exact origin is unknown. It is believed to be in reference to the Alms Box placed in areas of worship to collect donations to the poor. Also, it may come from a custom in the late Roman/early Christian era, wherein metal boxes placed outside churches were used to collect special offerings tied to the Feast of Saint Stephen, which in the Western Church falls on the same day as Boxing Day.\n\nBoxing Day is a secular holiday that is traditionally celebrated on 26 December, the day after Christmas Day. 26 December is also St. Stephen's Day, a religious holiday.\n\nIn the UK, Boxing Day is a bank holiday (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland since 1871). When 26 December falls on a Saturday, the Boxing Day public holiday is moved to the substitute day, which is the following Monday. If 26 December falls on a Sunday, the substitute public holiday is the following Tuesday. As Boxing Day was traditionally the first week day (historically Monday–Saturday) after Christmas, it cannot technically be on a Sunday as that is considered to be the day of worship. However, 26 December is nowadays generally referred to as Boxing Day, even when it falls on the Sunday.\n\nIn Scotland, Boxing Day has been specified as an additional bank holiday since 1974, by Royal Proclamation under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971.\n\nIn Ireland – when the island as a whole was part of the United Kingdom – the Bank Holidays Act 1871 established the feast day of St. Stephen as a non-movable public holiday on 26 December. Following partition in 1920, Northern Ireland reverted to the British name, Boxing Day.\n\nIn Australia, Boxing Day is a federal public holiday. The Australian state of South Australia instead observes a public holiday known as Proclamation Day on the first weekday after Christmas Day or the Christmas Day holiday.\n\nIn New Zealand, Boxing Day is a statutory holiday; penalty rates and lieu time are provided to employees who work on Boxing Day.\n\nIn Canada, Boxing Day is a federal statutory holiday. Government offices, banks and post offices/delivery are closed. In some Canadian provinces, Boxing Day is a statutory holiday that is always celebrated on 26 December. In Canadian provinces where Boxing Day was a statutory holiday, and it falls on a Saturday or Sunday, compensation days are given in the following week.\n\nIn the United States, 26 December is not observed as \"Boxing Day\", per se, by the Federal Government; however, it may be converted to an extension of \"Christmas Day Observed\" when Christmas falls on a Sunday, thus affecting Federal offices and services, as well as banking, regular postal delivery and trading markets. The 26th is given as a holiday to some state employees, mainly in southern states: Kentucky, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Texas, but it is not known as Boxing Day. On 5 December 1996, Massachusetts Gov. William F. Weld declared 26 December as Boxing Day in Massachusetts, in response to the efforts of a local coalition of British citizens to \"transport the English tradition to the United States\", but not as an employee holiday.\n\nIn Nigeria, 26 December is a public holiday for working people or students. When it falls on Saturday or Sunday, there is always a holiday on Monday.\n\nIn the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, Boxing Day is primarily known as a shopping holiday, much like Black Friday (the day after Thanksgiving) in the United States. Boxing Day sales are common in Canada, Australia and New Zealand. It is a time when shops hold sales, often with dramatic price reductions. For many merchants, Boxing Day has become the day of the year with the greatest revenue. In the UK in 2009 it was estimated that up to 12 million shoppers appeared at the sales (a rise of almost 20% compared to 2008, although this was also affected by the fact that the VAT was about to revert to 17.5% from 1 January, following the temporary reduction to 15%).\n\nMany retailers open very early (typically 5 am or even earlier) and offer doorbuster deals and loss leaders to draw people to their stores. It is not uncommon for long queues to form early in the morning of 26 December, hours before the opening of shops holding the big sales, especially at big-box consumer electronics retailers. Many stores have a limited quantity of big draw or deeply discounted items. Because of the shoulder-to-shoulder crowds, many choose to stay at home and avoid the hectic shopping experience. The local media often cover the event, mentioning how early the shoppers began queuing up, and showing video of shoppers queuing and later leaving with their purchased items. Many retailers have implemented practices aimed at managing large numbers of shoppers. They may limit entrances, restrict the number of patrons in a store at a time, provide tickets to people at the head of the queue to guarantee them a hot ticket item or canvass queued-up shoppers to inform them of inventory limitations.\n\nIn recent years, retailers have expanded deals to \"Boxing Week\". While Boxing Day is 26 December, many retailers will run the sales for several days before or after 26 December, often up to New Year's Eve. Notably, in the recession of late 2008, a record number of retailers were holding early promotions due to a weak economy. Canada's Boxing Day has often been compared with the American Super Saturday (the Saturday before Christmas) and Black Friday. From 2009 onward Black Friday deals become more prominent among Canadian retailers to discourage shoppers from crossing the border to the USA when the Canadian and USA dollars was close to parity, and this has lessened the appeal of Boxing Day in Canada somewhat as it was overtaken by Black Friday in terms of sales in 2013. Boxing Day is not and has never been a shopping holiday in the USA.\n\nIn some areas of Canada, particularly in Atlantic Canada and parts of Northern Ontario, most retailers are prohibited from opening on Boxing Day, either by provincial law or by municipal bylaw, or instead by informal agreement among major retailers to provide a day of relaxation following Christmas Day. In these areas, sales otherwise scheduled for 26 December are moved to the 27th. The city council of Greater Sudbury, Ontario, which was the largest city in Canada to maintain this restriction as of the early 2010s, formally repealed its store hours bylaw on 9 December 2014.\n\nIn 2009, many retailers with both online and High Street stores launched their online sales on Christmas Eve and their High Street sales on Boxing Day.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, it is traditional for both top-tier football leagues in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland, and the lower ones, as well as the rugby leagues, to hold a full programme of football and rugby union matches on Boxing Day. Originally, matches on Boxing Day were played against local rivals to avoid teams and their fans having to travel a long distance to an away game on the day after Christmas Day. Prior to the formation of leagues, a number of rugby fixtures took place on Boxing Day each year, notably Llanelli v London Welsh and Leicester v The Barbarians.\n\nIn Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, Test cricket matches are played on Boxing Day: for more details see Boxing Day Test.\n\nIn Australia, the first day of the Boxing Day Test in Melbourne and the start of the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race are on Boxing Day.\n\nIn horse racing, there is the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park Racecourse in Surrey, England. It is the second most prestigious chase in Britain, after the Cheltenham Gold Cup. In addition to the prestigious race at Kempton, in Britain it is usually the day with the highest number of racing meetings of the year, with eight in 2016, in addition to three more in Ireland.\n\nBoxing Day is one of the main days in the hunting calendar for hunts in the UK and US, with most hunts (both mounted foxhound or harrier packs and foot packs of beagles or bassets) holding meets, often in town or village centres.\n\nSeveral ice hockey contests are associated with the day. The IIHF World U20 Championship typically begins on 26 December, while the Spengler Cup also begins on 26 December in Davos, Switzerland; the Spengler Cup competition includes HC Davos, Team Canada, and other top European Hockey teams. The National Hockey League traditionally had close to a full slate of games (10 were played in 2011), following the league-wide days off given for Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. However, the 2013 collective bargaining agreement (which followed a lock-out) extended the league mandate of Christmas Eve and Christmas Day off to include Boxing Day, except when it falls on a Saturday, in which case the league can choose to make 23 December a league-wide off day instead for that year. In some African Commonwealth nations, particularly Ghana, Uganda, Malawi, Zambia and Tanzania, prize fighting contests are held on Boxing Day. This practice has also been followed for decades in Guyana and Italy.\n\nA notable tradition in Sweden is \"Annandagsbandy\", which formerly marked the start of the bandy season and always draws large crowds. Games traditionally begin at 1:15 pm.\n\n"}
{"id": "4687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4687", "title": "Balochistan, Pakistan", "text": "Balochistan, Pakistan\n\nBalochistan (Balochi, Pashto, , , ), is one of the four provinces of Pakistan forming the southwestern region of the country. Its provincial capital and largest city is Quetta. It has borders with Punjab and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the northeast, Sindh to the east and southeast, the Arabian Sea to the south, Iran to the west and Afghanistan to the north and northwest.\n\nThe main ethnic groups in the province are the Baloch people and the Pashtuns, who constitute 52% and 36%of the population respectively according to the preliminary 2011 census; the remaining 12% comprises smaller communities of Brahui, Hazaras, Sindhis, Punjabis and other settlers such as the Uzbeks and Turkmens. The name Balochistan means \"\"the land of the Baloch\"\" in many regional languages. Largely underdeveloped, its provincial economy is dominated by natural resources, especially its natural gas fields estimated to have sufficient capacity to supply Pakistan's demands over the medium to long term. Aside from Quetta, a further area of major economic importance is Gwadar Port on the Arabian Sea.\n\nBalochistan is noted for its unique culture and extremely dry desert climate. Baloch people practice Islam and are predominantly Sunni, similar to the rest of Pakistan.\n\nBalochistan occupies the very southeastern-most portion of the Iranian Plateau, the setting for the earliest known farming settlements in the pre-Indus Valley Civilisation era, the earliest of which was Mehrgarh, dated at 7000 BC, within the province. Balochistan marked the westernmost extent of the Civilisation. Centuries before the arrival of Islam in the 7th Century, parts of Balochistan was ruled by the Paratarajas, an Indo-Scythian dynasty. At certain times, the Kushans also held political sway in parts of Balochistan.\n\nA theory of the origin of the Baloch people, the largest ethnic group in the region, is that they are of Median descent, and are a Kurdish group that has absorbed Dravidian genes and cultural traits, primarily from Brahui people.\n\nIn 654, Abdulrehman ibn Samrah, governor of Sistan and the newly emerged Rashidun caliphate at the expense of Sassanid Persia and the Byzantine Empire, sent an Islamic army to crush a revolt in Zaranj, which is now in southern Afghanistan. After conquering Zaranj, a column of the army pushed north, conquering Kabul and Ghazni, in the Hindu Kush mountain range, while another column moved through Quetta District in north-western Balochistan and conquered the area up to the ancient cities of \"Dawar\" and \"Qandabil\" (Bolan). It is documented that the major settlements, falling within today's province, became in 654 controlled by the Rashidun caliphate, except for the well-defended mountain town of \"QaiQan\" which is now Kalat.\n\nDuring the caliphate of Ali, revolt broke out in southern Balochistan's Makran region. In 663, during the reign of Umayyad Caliph Muawiyah I his Muslim rule lost control of north-eastern Balochistan and Kalat when Haris ibn Marah and a large part of his army died in battle against a revolt in Kalat.\n\nIn the 15th century, Mir Chakar Khan Rind became the first Sirdar of Afghan and Pakistani Balochistan, he was a close aide of the Timurid ruler Humayun, and was succeeded by the Khanate of Kalat, which owed allegiance to the Mughal Empire, and later Nader Shah won the allegiance of the rulers of eastern Balochistan, he ceded Kalhora, one of the Sindh territories of Sibi-Kachi to the Khanate of Kalat. Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Empire, also won the allegiance of that area's rulers. Most of the area would eventually revert to local Baloch control – after Afghan rule, many Baloch fought during the Third Battle of Panipat.\n\nDuring the period of the British Raj from the fall of the Durrani Empire in 1823 four Princely States were recognised and reinforced in Balochistan: Makran, Kharan, Las Bela and Kalat. In 1876, Robert Sandeman negotiated the Treaty of Kalat, which brought the Khan's territories, including Kharan, Makran, and Las Bela, under British protection even though they remained independent Princely states. After the Second Afghan War was ended by the Treaty of Gandamak in May 1879, the Afghan Emir ceded the districts of Quetta, Pishin, Harnai, Sibi and Thal Chotiali to British control. On 1 April 1883, the British took control of the Bolan Pass, south-east of Quetta, from the Khan of Kalat. In 1887, small additional areas of Balochistan were declared British territory. In 1893, Sir Mortimer Durand negotiated an agreement with the Amir of Afghanistan, Abdur Rahman Khan, to fix the Durand Line running from Chitral to Balochistan as the boundary between the Emirate of Afghanistan and British-controlled areas. Two devastating earthquakes occurred in Balochistan during British colonial rule: the 1935 Balochistan earthquake, which devastated Quetta, and the 1945 Balochistan earthquake with its epicentre in the Makran region.\n\nBalochistan contained a Chief Commissioner's province and four princely states under the British Raj. The province's Shahi Jirga and the non-official members of the Quetta Municipality opted for Pakistan unanimously on 29 June 1947. Three of the princely states, Makran, Las Bela and Kharan, acceded to Pakistan in 1947 after independence. But the ruler of the fourth princely state, the Khan of Kalat, Ahmad Yar Khan, who used to call Jinnah his 'father', declared Kalat's independence as this was one of the options given to all of the 535 princely states by British Prime Minister Clement Attlee.\n\nKalat finally acceded to Pakistan on March 27, 1948 after the 'strange help' of All India Radio and a period of negotiations and bureaucratic tactics used by Pakistan. The signing of the Instrument of Accession by Ahmad Yar Khan, led his brother, Prince Abdul Karim, to revolt against his brother's decision in July 1948. Princes Agha Abdul Karim Baloch and Muhammad Rahim, refused to lay down arms, leading the Dosht-e Jhalawan in unconventional attacks on the army until 1950. The Princes fought a lone battle without support from the rest of Balochistan. Jinnah and his successors allowed Yar Khan to retain his title until the province's dissolution in 1955.\n\nInsurgencies by Baloch nationalists took place in 1948, 1958–59, 1962–63 and 1973–77 – with a new and reportedly stronger ongoing insurgency by autonomy-seeking Baloch groups beginning in 2003. While most Baloch support the demand for autonomy, the majority are not interested in seceding from Pakistan.\n\nAt a press conference on 8 June 2015 in Quetta, Home Minister Sarfraz Bugti accused India's prime minister of openly supporting terrorism. Bugti implicated India's Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) of being responsible for recent attacks at military bases in Smangli and Khalid, and for subverting the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) agreement.\n\nBalochistan is situated in the southwest of Pakistan and covers an area of . It is Pakistan's largest province by area, constituting 44% of Pakistan's total land mass. The province is bordered by Afghanistan to the north and north-west, Iran to the south-west, Punjab and Sindh, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the north-east. To the south lies the Arabian Sea. Balochistan is located on the south-eastern part of the Iranian plateau. It borders the geopolitical regions of the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Central Asia and South Asia. Balochistan lies at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz and provides the shortest route from seaports to Central Asia. Its geographical location has placed the otherwise desolate region in the scope of competing global interests for all of recorded history.\n\nThe capital city Quetta is located in a densely populated portion of the Sulaiman Mountains in the north-east of the province. It is situated in a river valley near the Bolan Pass, which has been used as the route of choice from the coast to Central Asia, entering through Afghanistan's Kandahar region. The British and other historic empires have crossed the region to invade Afghanistan by this route.\n\nBalochistan is rich in exhaustible and renewable resources; it is the second major supplier of natural gas in Pakistan. The province's renewable and human resource potential has not been systematically measured or exploited due to pressures from within and without Pakistan. Local inhabitants have chosen to live in towns and have relied on sustainable water sources for thousands of years.\n\nThe climate of the upper highlands is characterised by very cold winters and hot summers. In the lower highlands, winters vary from extremely cold in northern districts Ziarat, Quetta, Kalat, Muslim Baagh and Khanozai to milder conditions closer to the Makran coast. Winters are mild on the plains, with temperature never falling below freezing point. Summers are hot and dry, especially in the arid zones of Chagai and Kharan districts. The plains are also very hot in summer, with temperatures reaching .The record highest temperature, , was recorded in Sibi on 26 May 2010, exceeding the previous record, . Other hot areas include Turbat and Dalbandin. The desert climate is characterised by hot and very arid conditions. Occasionally, strong windstorms make these areas very inhospitable.\n\nThe economy of Balochistan is largely based upon the production of natural gas, coal and other minerals.\n\nBalochistan has been called a \"neglected province where a majority of population lacks amenities\". Since the mid-1970s the province's share of Pakistan's GDP has dropped from 4.9 to 3.7%, and as of 2007 it had the highest poverty rate and infant and maternal mortality rate, and the lowest literacy rate in the country, factors some allege have contributed to the insurgency. However, in 7th NFC awards Punjab province and Federal contributed to increase Baluchistan share more than its entitled population based share. In Balochistan poverty is increasing. In 2001–2002 poverty incidences was at 48% and by 2005–2006 was at 50.9%.\n\nThough the province remains largely underdeveloped, several major development projects, including the construction of a new deep sea port at the strategically important town of Gwadar, are in progress in Balochistan. The port is projected to be the hub of an energy and trade corridor to and from China and the Central Asian republics. The Mirani Dam on the Dasht River, west of Turbat in the Makran Division, is being built to provide water to expand agricultural land use by where it would otherwise be unsustainable. In the south east is an oil refinery owned by Byco International Incorporated (BII), which is capable of processing 120,000 barrels of oil per day. A power station is located adjacent to the refinery. Several cement plants and a marble factory are also located there. One of the world's largest ship breaking yards is located on the coast.\n\nBalochistan's share of Pakistan's national income has historically ranged between 3.7% to 4.9%. Since 1972, Balochistan's gross income has grown in size by 2.7 times. Outside Quetta, the resource extraction infrastructure of the province is gradually developing but still lags far behind other parts of Pakistan.\n\nThe agreements for royalty rights and ownership of mineral rights were reached during a period of unprecedented natural disasters, economic, social, political, and cultural unrest in Pakistan. The negotiations were widely considered to be insufficiently transparent.\n\nIn common with the other provinces of Pakistan, Balochistan has a parliamentary form of government. The ceremonial head of the province is the Governor, who is appointed by the President of Pakistan on the advice of the provincial Chief Minister. The Chief Minister, the province's chief executive, is normally the leader of the largest political party or alliance of parties in the provincial assembly.\n\nThe unicameral Provincial Assembly of Balochistan comprises 65 seats of which 11 are reserved for women and 3 reserved for non-Muslims. The judicial branch of government is carried out by the Balochistan High Court, which is based in Quetta and headed by a Chief Justice.\n\nBesides dominant Pakistan-wide political parties (such as the Pakistan Muslim League (N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party), Balochistan nationalist parties (such as the National Party and the Balochistan National Party) have been prominent in the province.\n\nIn order to implement Closed Border Policy, Frontier Corps was raised by British in 1870 to perform the border security duties along the Indo-Afghan Buffer Zone, having its HQ in Peshawar, NWFP. 5 Corps, i.e. Zhob Militia, Pishin Scouts, Chagai Militia, Kalat Scouts and Sibi Scouts were deployed in Balochistan as border security and internal security force. FC Balochistan was formally raised in Mar 1974, comprising seven units: 5 units in situ, 2 new units Maiwand Rifles, Mekran Scouts and 1 Training Center at Loralai. In 1977, 4 more units, Ghazaband Scouts, Loralai Scouts, Bhambore Rifles and Kharan Rifles were raised. In the wake of 9/11, Bolan Scouts was raised at Muslim Bagh along Pak- Afghan Border, bringing the total to 12 Corps. The additional raising was undertaken in year 2005–06 to further strengthen the security arrangements. In this package 2 x Sector Headquarters, 3 Corps and 4 x Mortar Batteries were raised. To meet the training requirements of this sizeable force, FC Battle School was raised at Beleli in year 2006. To cater for the growing requirement of complex border and Internal Security operations, on 1 July 2007, a Special Operations Wing (SOW), IAC Squadron and Tank Regiment were also raised from within own resources. Sui Rifles was raised in March 2011.\n\nFor administrative purposes, the province is divided into six Divisions – Kalat, Makran, Nasirabad, Quetta, Sibi and Zhob. This divisional level was abolished in 2000, but restored after the 2008 election. Each Division is under an appointed Commissioner. The six Divisions are further subdivided into 32 districts:\nNote: In this map, Lehri is shown within Sibi District on #27. Sohbatpur is shown within Jafarabad District on #8.\n\nBalochistan's population density is low due to the mountainous terrain and scarcity of water. In March 2012, preliminary census figures showed that the population of Balochistan had reached 13,162,222, not including the districts of Khuzdar, Kech and Panjgur, a 139.3% increase from 5,501,164 in 1998, representing 6.85% of Pakistan's total population. This was the largest increase in population by any province of Pakistan during that time period. Official estimates of Balochistan's population grew from approximately 7.45 million in 2003 to 7.8 million in 2005. According to the 1998 Census, Balochistan had a total population of 6,565,885 of which most (6,484,006) were Muslims. There were also Hindu and Christian minorities in the province. The 1998 Census recorded that the Hindu population in the province was approximately 39,000 (including the Scheduled Castes). There was also a Christian minority of 26,462 individuals in the province.\n\nAccording to the Ethnologue, households whose primary language is Makrani constitutes 13%, Rukhshani 10%, and Sulemani 7% of the population. Pashto is also spoken by around 30% of the population and 13% of households speak Brahui. The remaining 18% of the population speaks various languages, including Lasi, Urdu, Punjabi, Hazargi, Sindhi, Saraiki, Dehvari, Dari, Tajik, Hindko, Uzbik, and Hindki.\n\nIn the Lasbela District, the majority of the population speaks Lasi.\n\nThe 2005 census concerning Afghans in Pakistan showed that a total of 769,268 Afghan refugees were temporarily staying in Balochistan. However, there are probably fewer Afghans living in Balochistan today as many refugees repatriated in 2013. As of 2015, there are only 327,778 registered Afghan refugees according to the UNHCR.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4688", "title": "William M. Tweed", "text": "William M. Tweed\n\nWilliam Magear Tweed (April 3, 1823 – April 12, 1878)—often erroneously referred to as \"William \"Marcy\" Tweed\" (see below), and widely known as \"Boss\" Tweed—was an American politician most notable for being the \"boss\" of Tammany Hall, the Democratic Party political machine that played a major role in the politics of 19th century New York City and State. At the height of his influence, Tweed was the third-largest landowner in New York City and a director of the Erie Railroad, the Tenth National Bank, and the New-York Printing Company, as well as proprietor of the Metropolitan Hotel.\n\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852 and the New York County board of supervisors in 1858, the year he became the head of the Tammany Hall political machine. He was also elected to the New York State Senate in 1867, but Tweed's greatest influence came from being an appointed member of a number of boards and commissions, his control over political patronage in New York City through Tammany, and his ability to ensure the loyalty of voters through jobs he could create and dispense on city-related projects.\n\nAccording to Tweed biographer Kenneth D. Ackerman:It's hard not to admire the skill behind Tweed's system ... The Tweed ring at its height was an engineering marvel, strong and solid, strategically deployed to control key power points: the courts, the legislature, the treasury and the ballot box. Its frauds had a grandeur of scale and an elegance of structure: money-laundering, profit sharing and organization.\n\nTweed was convicted for stealing an amount estimated by an aldermen's committee in 1877 at between $25 million and $45 million from New York City taxpayers through political corruption, although later estimates ranged as high as $200 million. Unable to make bail, he escaped from jail once, but was returned to custody. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail.\n\nTweed was born April 3, 1823, at 1 Cherry Street, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Son of a third-generation Scots-Irish chair-maker, Tweed grew up on Cherry Street. Tweed's religious affiliation was not widely known in his lifetime, but at the time of his funeral the \"New York Times\", quoting a family friend, reported that his parents had been Quakers and \"members of the old Rose Street Meeting house.\" At the age of 11, he left school to learn his father's trade, and then became an apprentice to a saddler. He also studied to be a bookkeeper and worked as a brushmaker for a company he had invested in, before eventually joining in the family business in 1852. On September 29, 1844, he married Mary Jane C. Skaden and lived with her family on Madison Street for two years.\n\nTweed became a member of the Odd Fellows and the Masons, and joined a volunteer fire company, Engine No. 12. In 1848, at the invitation of state assemblyman John J. Reilly, he and some friends organized the Americus Fire Company No. 6, also known as the \"Big Six\", as a volunteer fire company, which took as its symbol a snarling red Bengal tiger, a symbol which remained associated with Tweed and Tammany Hall for many years. At the time, volunteer fire companies competed vigorously with each other; some were connected with street gangs and had strong ethnic ties to various immigrant communities. The competition could be so fierce that buildings would sometimes burn down while the fire companies fought each other. Tweed became known for his ax-wielding violence, and was soon elected the Big Six foreman. Pressure from Alfred Carlson, the chief engineer, got him thrown out of the crew, but fire companies were also recruiting grounds for political parties at the time, and Tweed's exploits came to the attention of the Democratic politicians who ran the Seventh Ward, who put him up for Alderman in 1850, when Tweed was 26. He lost that election to the Whig candidate Morgan Morgans, but ran again the next year and won, garnering his first political position.\n\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852, but his two-year term was undistinguished. In an attempt by Republican reformers in Albany, the state capital, to control the Democratic-dominated New York City government, the power of the New York County Board of Supervisors was beefed up. The board had 12 members, six appointed by the mayor and six elected, and in 1858 Tweed was appointed to the board, which became his first vehicle for large-scale graft; Tweed and other supervisors forced vendors to pay a 15% overcharge to their \"ring\" in order to do business with the city. By 1853, Tweed was running the seventh ward for Tammany.\n\nAlthough he was not trained as a lawyer, Tweed's friend, Judge George G. Barnard, certified him as an attorney, and Tweed opened a law office on Duane Street. He ran for sheriff in 1861 and was defeated, but became the chairman of the Democratic General Committee shortly after the election, and was then chosen to be the head of Tammany's general committee in January 1863. Several months later, in April, he became \"Grand Sachem\", and began to be referred to as \"Boss\", especially after he tightened his hold on power by creating a small executive committee to run the club. Tweed then took steps to increase his income: he used his law firm to extort money, which was then disguised as legal services; he had himself appointed deputy street commissioner – a position with considerable access to city contractors and funding; he bought the New-York Printing Company, which became the city's official printer, and the city's stationery supplier, the Manufacturing Stationers' Company, and had both companies begin to overcharge for their goods and services. He also started to form what became known as the \"Tweed Ring\", by having his friends elected to office: George G. Barnard was elected Recorder of New York City; Peter B. Sweeny was elected New York County District Attorney; and Richard B. Connolly was elected City Comptroller.\n\nWith his new position and wealth came a change in style: Tweed began to favor wearing a large diamond in his shirtfront – a habit that Thomas Nast used to great effect in his attacks on Tweed in \"Harper's Weekly\" beginning in 1869 – and he bought a brownstone to live in at 41 West 36th Street, then a very fashionable area. He invested his now considerable illegal income in real estate, so that by the late 1860s he ranked among the biggest landowners in New York City.\n\nTweed was a member of the New York State Senate (4th D.) from 1868 to 1873, sitting in the 91st, 92nd, 93rd and 94th New York State Legislatures, but not taking his seat in the 95th and 96th New York State Legislatures. In the Senate he helped financiers Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk to take control of the Erie Railroad from Cornelius Vanderbilt by arranging for legislation that legitimized fake Erie stock certificates that Gould and Fisk had issued. In return, Tweed received a large block of stock and was made a director of the company.\n\nAfter the election of 1869, Tweed took control of the New York City government. His protégé, John T. Hoffman, the former mayor of the city, won election as governor, and Tweed garnered the support of good government reformers like Peter Cooper and the Union League Club, by proposing a new city charter which returned power to City Hall at the expense of the Republican-inspired state commissions. The new charter passed, thanks in part to $600,000 in bribes Tweed paid to Republicans, and was signed into law by Hoffman in 1870. Mandated new elections allowed Tammany to take over the city's Common Council when they won all fifteen aldermanic contests.\n\nThe new charter put control of the city's finances in the hands of a Board of Audit, which consisted of Tweed, who was Commissioner of Public Works, Mayor A. Oakey Hall and Comptroller Richard \"Slippery Dick\" Connolly, both Tammany men. Hall also appointed other Tweed associates to high offices — such as Peter B. Sweeny, who took over the Department of Public Parks — providing the Tweed Ring with even firmer control of the New York City government and enabling them to defraud the taxpayers of many more millions of dollars. In the words of Albert Bigelow Paine, \"their methods were curiously simple and primitive. There were no skilful manipulations of figures, making detection difficult ... Connolly, as Controller, had charge of the books, and declined to show them. With his fellows, he also 'controlled' the courts and most of the bar.\" Contractors working for the city – \"Ring favorites, most of them – were told to multiply the amount of each bill by five, or ten, or a hundred, after which, with Mayor Hall's 'O. K.' and Connolly's endorsement, it was paid ... through a go-between, who cashed the check, settled the original bill and divided the remainder ... between Tweed, Sweeny, Connolly and Hall\".\n\nFor example, the construction cost of the New York County Courthouse, begun in 1861, grew to nearly $13 million—about $178 million in today's dollars, and nearly twice the cost of the Alaska Purchase in 1867.\n\"A carpenter was paid $360,751 (roughly $4.9 million today) for one month's labor in a building with very little woodwork ... a plasterer got $133,187 ($1.82 million) for two days' work\".\n\nTweed and his friends also garnered huge profits from the development of the Upper East Side, especially Yorkville and Harlem. They would buy up undeveloped property, then use the resources of the city to improve the area—for instance by installing pipes to bring in water from the Croton Aqueduct—thus increasing the value of the land, after which they sold and took their profits. The focus on the east side also slowed down the development of the west side, the topography of which made it more expensive to improve. The ring also took their usual percentage of padded contracts, as well as raking off money from property taxes. Despite the corruption of Tweed and Tammany Hall, they did accomplish the development of upper Manhattan, though at the cost of tripling the city's bond debt to almost $90 million.\n\nDuring the Tweed era, the proposal to build a suspension bridge between New York and Brooklyn, then an independent city, was floated by Brooklyn-boosters, who saw the ferry connections as a bottleneck to Brooklyn's further development. In order to ensure that the Brooklyn Bridge project would go forward, State Senator Henry Cruse Murphy approached Tweed to find out whether New York's aldermen would approve the proposal. Tweed's response was that $60,000 for the aldermen would close the deal, and contractor William C. Kingsley put up the cash, which was delivered in a carpet bag. Tweed and two others from Tammany also received over half the private stock of the Bridge Company, the charter of which specified that only private stockholders had voting rights, so that even though the cities of Brooklyn and Manhattan put up most of the money, they essentially had no control over the project.\n\nTweed bought a mansion on Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street, and stabled his horses, carriages and sleighs on 40th Street. By 1871, he was a member of the board of directors of not only the Erie Railroad and the Brooklyn Bridge Company, but also the Third Avenue Railway Company and the Harlem Gas Light Company. He was president of the Guardian Savings Banks and he and his confederates set up the Tenth National Bank to better control their fortunes.\n\nTweed's downfall came in the wake of the Orange riot of 1871, which came after Tammany Hall banned a parade of Irish Protestants celebrating a historical victory against Catholicism, because of a riot the year before in which eight people died when a crowd of Irish Catholic laborers attacked the paraders. Under strong pressure from the newspapers and the Protestant elite of the city, Tammany reversed course, and the march was allowed to proceed, with protection from city policemen and state militia. The result was an even larger riot in which over 60 people were killed and more than 150 injured.\n\nAlthough Tammany's electoral power base was largely centered in the Irish immigrant population, it also needed the city's elite to acquiesce in its rule, and this was conditional on the machine's ability to control the actions of their people, but the July riot showed that this capability was not nearly as strong as had been supposed.\n\nTweed had for months been under attack from \"The New York Times\" and Thomas Nast, the cartoonist from \"Harper's Weekly\" – regarding Nast's cartoons, Tweed reportedly said, \"Stop them damned pictures. I don't care so much what the papers say about me. My constituents don't know how to read, but they can't help seeing them damned pictures!\" – but their campaign had only limited success in gaining traction. They were able to force an examination of the city's books, but the blue-ribbon commission of six businessmen appointed by Mayor A. Oakey Hall, a Tammany man, which included John Jacob Astor III, banker Moses Taylor and others who benefited from Tammany's actions, found that the books had been \"faithfully kept\", letting the air out of the effort to dethrone Tweed.\n\nThe response to the Orange riot changed everything, and only days afterwards the \"Times\"/Nast campaign began to garner popular support. More important, the \"Times\" started to receive inside information from County Sheriff James O'Brien, whose support for Tweed had fluctuated during Tammany's reign. O'Brien had tried to blackmail Tammany by threatening to expose the ring's embezzlement to the press, and when this failed he provided the evidence he had collected to the \"Times\". Shortly afterward, county auditor Matthew J. O'Rourke supplied additional details to the \"Times\", which was reportedly offered $5 million to not publish the evidence. The \"Times\" also obtained the accounts of the recently deceased James Watson, who was the Tweed Ring's bookkeeper, and these were published daily, culminating in a special four-page supplement on July 29 headlined \"Gigantic Frauds of the Ring Exposed\". In August, Tweed began to transfer ownership in his real-estate empire and other investments to his family members.\n\nThe exposé provoked an international crisis of confidence in New York City's finances, and, in particular, in its ability to repay its debts. European investors were heavily positioned in the city's bonds and were already nervous about its management – only the reputations of the underwriters were preventing a run on the city's securities. New York's financial and business community knew that if the city's credit was to collapse, it could potentially bring down every bank in the city with it.\n\nThus, the city's elite met at Cooper Union in September to discuss political reform: but for the first time, the conversation included not only the usual reformers, but also Democratic bigwigs such as Samuel J. Tilden, who had been thrust aside by Tammany. The consensus was that the \"wisest and best citizens\" should take over the governance of the city and attempt to restore investor confidence. The result was the formation of the Executive Committee of Citizens and Taxpayers for Financial Reform of the City (also known as \"the Committee of Seventy\"), which attacked Tammany by cutting off the city's funding. Property owners refused to pay their municipal taxes, and a judge—Tweed's old friend George Barnard, no less—enjoined the city Comptroller from issuing bonds or spending money. Unpaid workers turned against Tweed, marching to City Hall demanding to be paid. Tweed doled out some funds from his own purse—$50,000—but it was not sufficient to end the crisis, and Tammany began to lose its essential base.\n\nShortly thereafter, the Comptroller resigned, appointing Andrew Haswell Green, an associate of Tilden's, as his replacement. Green loosened the purse strings again, allowing city departments not under Tammany control to borrow money to operate. Green and Tilden had the city's records closely examined, and discovered money that went directly from city contractors into Tweed's pocket. The following day, they had Tweed arrested.\n\nTweed was released on $1 million bail, and Tammany set to work to recover its position through the ballot box. Tweed was re-elected to the state senate in November 1871, due to his personal popularity and largesse in his district, but in general Tammany did not do well, and the members of the Tweed Ring began to flee the jurisdiction, many going overseas. Tweed was re-arrested, forced to resign his city positions, and was replaced as Tammany's leader. Once again, he was released on bail—$8 million this time—but Tweed's supporters, such as Jay Gould, felt the repercussions of his fall from power.\n\nTweed's first trial, in January 1873, ended when the jury was unable to agree on a verdict. His retrial in November resulted in convictions on 204 of 220 counts, a fine of $12,750 (the equivalent of $ today) and a prison sentence of 12 years; a higher court, however, reduced Tweed's sentence to one year. After his release from prison, New York State filed a civil suit against Tweed, attempting to recover $6 million in embezzled funds. Unable to put up the $3 million bail, Tweed was locked up in the Ludlow Street Jail, although he was allowed home visits. On one of these, Tweed escaped and fled to Spain, where he worked as a common seaman on a Spanish ship. The U.S. government discovered his whereabouts and arranged for his arrest once he reached the Spanish border; he was recognized from Nast's political cartoons. He was turned over to an American warship, the USS \"Franklin\", which delivered him to authorities in New York City on November 23, 1876, and he was returned to prison.\n\nDesperate and broken, Tweed now agreed to testify about the inner workings of his corrupt Ring to a special committee set up by the Board of Aldermen, in return for his release, but after he did so, Tilden, now governor of New York, refused to abide by the agreement, and Tweed remained incarcerated. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail on April 12, 1878, from severe pneumonia, and was buried in the Brooklyn Green-Wood Cemetery. Mayor Smith Ely would not allow the flag at City Hall to be flown at half staff.\n\nIn depictions of Tweed and the Tammany Hall organization, historians have emphasized the thievery and conspiratorial nature of Boss Tweed, along with lining his own pockets and those of his friends and allies. The theme is that the sins of corruption so violated American standards of political rectitude that they far overshadow Tweed's positive contributions to New York City.\n\nAlthough he held numerous important public offices and was one of a handful of senior leaders of Tammany Hall, as well as the state legislature and the state Democratic Party, Tweed was never the sole \"boss\" of New York City. He shared control of the city with numerous less famous people, such as the villains depicted in the Nast's famous circle of guilt cartoon shown above. Seymour J. Mandelbaum has argued that, apart from the corruption he engaged in, Tweed was a modernizer who prefigured certain elements of the Progressive Era in terms of more efficient city management. Much of the money he siphoned off from the city treasury went to needy constituents who appreciated the free food at Christmas time and remembered it at the next election, and to precinct workers who provided the muscle of his machine. As a legislator he worked to expand and strengthen welfare programs, especially those by private charities, schools, and hospitals. With a base in the Irish Catholic community, he opposed efforts of Protestants to require the reading of the King James Bible in public schools, which was done deliberately to keep out Catholics. He facilitated the founding of the New York Public Library, even though one of its founders, Samuel Tilden, was Tweed's sworn enemy in the Democratic Party.\n\nTweed recognized that the support of his constituency was necessary for him to remain in power, and as a consequence he used the machinery of the city's government to provide numerous social services, including building more orphanages, almshouses and public baths. Tweed also fought for the New York State Legislature to donate to private charities of all religious denominations, and subsidize Catholic schools and hospitals. From 1869 to 1871, under Tweed's influence, the state of New York spent more on charities than for the entire time period from 1852 to 1868 combined. Tweed also pushed through funding for a teachers college and prohibition of corporal punishment in schools, as well as salary increases for school teachers.\n\nDuring Tweed's regime, the main business thoroughfare Broadway was widened between 34th Street and 59th Street, land was secured for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the Upper East Side and Upper West Side were developed and provided the necessary infrastructure – all to the benefit of the purses of the Tweed Ring, but also, ultimately, to the benefit of the people of the city.\n\nAccording to Leo Hershkowitz in \"Tweed's New York: Another Look\", there is no evidence of any personal financial gain on Tweed's part, despite the implications of Thomas Nast in \"Harper's Weekly\" and the editors of \"The New York Times\", which both had ties to the Republican party. In part, the campaign against Tweed diverted public attention from Republican scandals such as the Whiskey Ring.\n\nTweed himself wanted no particular recognition of his achievements, such as they were. When it was proposed, in March 1871, when he was at the height of his power, that a statue be erected in his honor, he declared: \"Statues are not erected to living men ... I claim to be a live man, and hope (Divine Providence permitting) to survive in all my vigor, politically and physically, some years to come.\" One of Tweed's unwanted legacies is that he has become \"the archetype of the bloated, rapacious, corrupt city boss\".\n\nTweed never signed his name with anything other than a plain \"M.\", and his middle name is often mistakenly listed as \"Marcy\". His actual middle name was \"Magear\", his mother's maiden name; Tweed's son's name was William Magear Tweed, Jr. The confusion derives from a Nast cartoon with a picture of Tweed, supplemented with a quote from William L. Marcy, the former governor of New York.\n\nIn 1945 Boss Tweed was portrayed by Noah Beery, Sr. in the Broadway production of \"Up In Central Park\", a musical comedy with music by Sigmund Romberg. The role was played by Malcolm Lee Beggs for a revival in 1947. In the 1948 film version, Tweed is played by Vincent Price.\n\nOn the 1963–1964 CBS TV series \"The Great Adventure\", which presented one-hour dramatizations of the lives of historical figures, Edward Andrews portrayed Tweed in the episode \"The Man Who Stole New York City\", about the campaign by \"The New York Times\" to bring down Tweed. The episode aired on December 13, 1963.\n\nIn John Varley's 1977 science-fiction novel, \"The Ophiuchi Hotline\", a crooked politician in a 27th-century human settlement on the Moon assumes the name \"Boss Tweed\" in emulation of the 19th-century politician, and names his lunar headquarters \"Tammany Hall\".\n\nTweed was played by Philip Bosco in the 1986 TV movie \"Liberty\". According to a review of the film in \"The New York Times\", it was Tweed who made the suggestion to call the Statue of Liberty by that name, instead of its formal name \"Liberty Enlightening the World\", in order to read better in newspaper headlines.\n\nAndrew O'Hehir of \"The New York Times\" notes that \"Forever\", a 2003 novel by Pete Hamill, and \"Gangs of New York\", a 2002 film, both \"offer a significant supporting role to the legendary Manhattan political godfather Boss Tweed\", among other thematic similarities. In a review of the latter work, Chuck Rudolph praised Jim Broadbent's portrayal of Tweed as \"giving the role a masterfully heartless composure\".\n\nTweed appears as an antagonist in the novel, \"Assassin's Creed Last Descendants\" where he is the Grand Master of the American Templars during the American Civil War.\n\n\nNotes\nBibliography\n\nFurther reading\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "4689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4689", "title": "Balsall Heath", "text": "Balsall Heath\n\nBalsall Heath is a working class, inner-city area of Birmingham, West Midlands, England. It has a diverse cultural mix of people and is the location of the Balti Triangle.\n\nBalsall Heath was agricultural land between Moseley village and the city of Birmingham until the 1850s when expansion along Moseley Road joined the two. The area was originally part of the Worcestershire parish of King's Norton, and was added to the county borough of Birmingham in Warwickshire on 1 October 1891.\n\nDuring negotiations in the previous year it had been promised a public baths and a free library. In 1895, the library was opened on Moseley Road and, in 1907, Balsall Heath Baths were opened in an adjoining building. \n\nIn 1900, the city's College of Art was also opened on Moseley Road. By this time the small lake (\"Lady Pool\" on old maps) at the end of Ladypool Road had been filled in to create a park. \n\nBalsall Heath initially had a reasonably affluent population, which can still be seen in the dilapidated grandeur of some of the larger houses. A railway station on Brighton Road (on the Birmingham to Bristol line) led to further expansion, and the end of the 19th century saw a proliferation of high-density small terraced houses.\n\nA Muslim community was started in June 1940 when two Yemenis purchased an artisan cottage on Mary Street. With the mosque being located in the area, more Muslim immigrants began to move into private lodgings in Balsall Heath. Today, Balsall Heath has one of the largest Muslim communities in Birmingham. It is also home to diverse communities from across the Commonwealth.\n\nBy the 1980s, many of Balsall Heath's houses were in a dilapidated condition; some still lacked bathrooms or indoor toilets. The local council considered demolishing these properties but chose to refurbish them as part of an urban renewal scheme. Most of these Victorian terraces still exist and, along with more modern social housing, characterise the area today. The area's traditional 'brick' pavements were replaced at this time by the more modern and conventional paving slabs. \n\nBalsall Heath's low rents also attracted a bohemian student population. Its proximity to the University of Birmingham, the city centre and the \"trendy\" area of Moseley were all contributing factors. There was little conflict between the students and locals despite their vastly differing lifestyles. However, a knife-incident in 1991 led to an article in \"Redbrick\" warning students not to live in the area.\n\nIn July 2005, Balsall Heath was hit by a tornado, which devastated many buildings around Church Road and Ladypool Road. Birmingham City Council offered loans to those who would otherwise be unable to repair their properties, and the area has now made a full recovery.\n\nStreet prostitution first appeared in Balsall Heath during the 1950s. Property values fell, attracting Birmingham's poorer migrants. By the 1970s, the area was notorious for street robberies and drug dealing. Cheddar Road was the centre of a red-light district worked by 450 women. About half of the 50 houses on this road had prostitutes advertising themselves in the windows, similar to Amsterdam. It was labelled Britain's busiest cul-de-sac.\n\nIn 1986, an organisation called ANAWIM was formed by the Sisters of Charity to provide outreach support to the prostitutes. \n\nIn September 1992, a report was published encouraging the formation of a zone of tolerance towards prostitution in Balsall Heath. This was opposed by residents and a local police inspector. In the following year Samo Paull, a woman working as a prostitute, was abducted from Balsall Heath and murdered. \n\nIn 1994, residents began to organise street patrols forcing the prostitutes and street criminals out of the area. These patrols had the qualified support of the police but were regarded as vigilantes by some. There was an immediate two-thirds reduction in street and window prostitution. By November 1995, they had been almost completely eliminated.\n\nThe area has enjoyed a slow revival. House prices are now similar to those in other inner-city areas, while the crime rate is among the lowest.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4690", "title": "Bunge &amp; Born", "text": "Bunge &amp; Born\n\nBunge y Born was a multinational corporation based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, whose diverse interests included food processing and international trade in grains and oilseeds. It is now known as Bunge Limited.\n\nBunge & Born was founded in 1884 by Ernesto Bunge, a German Argentine whose uncle, Carl Bunge, had been Consul General in Argentina for both the Netherlands and Prussia, and his brother-in-law, Jorge Born, who had recently arrived from Antwerp. The company superseded the Bunge Company founded in Amsterdam by Johann Bunge, in 1818. Following the purchase of of prime pampas wheat fields, Bunge & Born established \"Centenera\", their first food processing plant, in 1899. They had one of the largest wheat mills in the country built on a Puerto Madero lot in 1902, and with it, established \"Molinos Río de la Plata\" (later a leader in the local retail foods market).\n\nThe company started Argentina's first burlap bag manufacturer, following which they successfully lobbied government policy makers for protective tariffs on the then-critical commercial staple. They established a mortgage bank, the \"Banco Hipotecario Franco Argentino\", and a subsidiary in Brazil in 1905, and by 1910, they reportedly controlled 80% of Argentine cereal exports (Argentina was, by then, the world's third-largest grain exporter). They later established paint manufacturer \"Alba\" (1925), chemical and fertilizer maker \"Compañía Química\", and textile maker \"Grafa\" (1932), among others; by the late 1920s, the company's annual export receipts alone reached US$300 million. The company inaugurated its neo-gothic Buenos Aires headquarters on Leandro Alem Avenue, designed by local architect Pablo Naeff, in 1926.\n\nBunge & Born's near-monopoly on cereal and flour exports ended with populist President Juan Perón's 1946 establishment of the IAPI, a state agricultural purchasing and export agent. The company responded by extending its reach into the country fast-growing retail processed foods market, and though its prominence as the nation's chief exporter was partly restored by Perón's 1955 ousting and the IAPI's liquidation, its focus remained domestic over the next three decades. A privately held company, Bunge & Born did not release periodical financial statements, though it did report US$2bn in gross receipts in 1962; by then it had become a leader in commodity futures trading, operating 110 offices worldwide.\n\nThe Bunge, Born, Hirsch, Engels and De La Tour families remained the company's chief stock-holders, and by extension, leaders in the domestic textile, paint, chemical, fertilizer, and food processing industries. On September 19, 1974, however, the consortium was shaken by the kidnapping of siblings Jorge and Juan Born by the far-left terrorist group, Montoneros. The Born brothers were kept in a known Argentine State Intelligence safehouse for nine months until their June 1975 release, something made possible without public suspicion of outside involvement by the agency's numerous contacts inside the Montoneros (including the leader, Mario Firmenich). Freed for a US$60 million ransom (the largest on record at that time), the ordeal triggered the company headquarters' relocation to São Paulo, Brazil, and contributed to the March 1976 coup.\n\nRetaining their Argentine interests (44 companies, by the 1980s), the families continued to suffer from ongoing disputes, and in 1987, CEO Mario Hirsch died suddenly. The election of Carlos Menem to the Argentine Presidency in May 1989, however, resulted in an agreement between the President-elect and Jorge Born that gave the company partial control over national economic policy. Bunge & Born provided the Menem government with its first two economy ministers, and the combination of large rate increases on public services (around 500%), a simplified exchange rate and a massive, mandatory wage hike led to a sharp economic turnaround between July and November 1989. This foray into government policy making, however, ended in a new currency crisis that December and the failure (compounded by the company's lackluster business performance) resulted in Born's 1991 ouster from the board; he was replaced by Chief Operations Officer Octavio Caraballo.\n\nBeset by the rift between Jorge Born and his brother, Juan, the prior unity between the shareholders disintegrated as Caraballo struggled to modernize the company. Family frictions intensified when Jorge Born formed a business partnership with one of his former kidnappers, erstwhile Montonero strategist Rodolfo Galimberti.\n\nThe company was converted into the Bermuda-registered Bunge International in 1994, retaining the Bunge y Born name only in Argentina. Bunge remained a privately held company of 180 shareholders (including the longtime controlling family interests) and divested itself in 1998 of almost all its retail foods interests in favor of a greater role in international agribusiness and commodity markets; by then the company's gross annual turnover had reached US$13 billion. Bunge ultimately went public on the NYSE in 2001, becoming \"Bunge Limited\".\n"}
{"id": "4691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4691", "title": "Big Apple", "text": "Big Apple\n\n\"Big Apple\" is a nickname for New York City. It was first popularized in the 1920s by John J. Fitz Gerald, a sports writer for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\". Its popularity since the 1970s is due in part to a promotional campaign by the New York tourist authorities.\n\nAlthough the history of \"Big Apple \" was once thought a mystery, a clearer picture of the term's history has emerged due to the work of amateur etymologist Barry Popik and Gerald Cohen of Missouri University of Science and Technology. A number of false theories had previously existed, including a claim that the term derived from a woman named Eve who ran a brothel in the city. This was subsequently exposed as a hoax.\n\nThe earliest known usage of 'big apple' appears in the book \"The Wayfarer in New York\" (1909), in which author Edward S. Martin writes: Kansas is apt to see in New York a greedy city... It inclines to think that the big apple gets a disproportionate share of the national sap. William Safire considered this the coinage, but the \"Random House Dictionary of American Slang\" has described the usage as \"metaphorical or perhaps proverbial, rather than a concrete example of the later slang term\".\n\n\"The Big Apple\" was popularized as a name for New York City by John J. Fitz Gerald in a number of horse-racing articles for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\" in the 1920s. The earliest of these was a casual reference on 3rd May, 1921:\n\nFitz Gerald referred to the \"big apple\" frequently thereafter. He explained his use in a column dated 18th February, 1924, under the headline \"Around the Big Apple\":\n\nFitz Gerald's reference to \"dusky\" stable hands suggests the term's origin may lie in African-American culture. Evidence for this may be found in the \"Chicago Defender\", an African-American newspaper that had a national circulation. Writing for the \"Defender\" on 16th September 1922, “Ragtime” Billy Tucker used the name \"big apple\" to refer to New York in a non-horse-racing context:\n\nTucker had also earlier used \"big apple\" as a reference to Los Angeles. It is possible that he simply understood \"big apple\" as a nickname for any large city:\n\nBy the late 1920s, New York writers other than Fitz Gerald were starting to use \"Big Apple\" and were using it in contexts other than horse-racing. \"The Big Apple\" was a popular song and dance in the 1930s. Walter Winchell and other writers continued to use the term in the 1940s and 1950s, but by the 1960s it had generally come to be known as an old name for New York.\n\nIn the early 1970s, however, the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau (now NYC & Company, New York City's official marketing and tourism organization) began to promote the city's \"Big Apple\" nickname under the leadership of its president, Charles Gillett. It has remained popular since then.\n\nMayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in 1997 signed legislation designating as \"Big Apple Corner\" the southwest corner of West 54th Street and Broadway, the corner on which John J. Fitz Gerald lived from 1934 to 1963. As part of the celebrations following as his election as President of the United States in 2016, Donald Trump hosted a party which he named 'The Big Apple Ball' and which featured themed decorations and cut-outs of New York landmarks in honor of his home city.\n\nToday the name enjoys exclusive ubiquity in literature and speech referring to New York City, and is used with regularity by journalists and news-headline writers across the English-speaking world.\n\nThe term \"big apple\" was used by Frank Sinatra in conversation with opera singer Dorothy Kirsten on an episode of the NBC radio program \"Light Up Time\" on 28th March, 1950.\n\nIn \"Evita\", Buenos Aires is referred to as \"B.A., Buenos Aires, Big Apple\" in the song \"Eva, Beware of the City.\" This line, produced by lyricist Tim Rice, does not appear to reflect any pre-existing usage.\n\nThe New York Mets baseball team have featured a \"Home Run Apple\" that rises whenever a Mets player hits a home run. It has become a symbol of the Mets baseball team, recognized throughout Major League Baseball as an iconic feature of the Mets' stadiums. It first appeared in Shea Stadium, and the original can still be seen on display at Citi Field, outside the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. Citi Field now uses a new apple, one that is much larger than original.\n\nUses of the term abound elsewhere in the names of cultural products and events in or concerning New York, including the Big Apple Anime Fest, the Big Apple Theater Festival, Jess Teong's The Kid from the Big Apple and Kajagoogoo's Big Apple, and playful uses of the nickname have been seen, such as Patrick Downey's 2008 historical study of New York City's criminal underworld, entitled \"Bad Seeds in the Big Apple.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "4692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4692", "title": "Boston Corbett", "text": "Boston Corbett\n\nThomas P. \"Boston\" Corbett (January 29, 1832 – presumed dead c. September 1, 1894) was a Union Army soldier who shot and killed President Abraham Lincoln's assassin, John Wilkes Booth. Corbett was initially arrested for disobeying orders, but was later released and was largely considered a hero by the media and the public.\n\nKnown for his devout religious beliefs and eccentric behavior, Corbett drifted around the United States before disappearing around 1888. Circumstantial evidence suggests that he died in the Great Hinckley Fire in September 1894, although this remains impossible to substantiate.\n\nCorbett was born in London and immigrated with his family to New York City in 1839. The Corbetts moved frequently before eventually settling in Troy, New York. As a young man, Corbett began apprenticing as hatter, a profession that he would hold intermittently throughout his life. As a hatter, Corbett was regularly exposed to the fumes of mercury(II) nitrate, then used in the treatment of fur to produce felt used on hats. Excessive exposure to the compound can lead to hallucinations, psychosis and twitching (known as the \"hatter's shakes\"). Historians have theorized that the mental issues Corbett exhibited before and after the Civil War may have been caused by this exposure.\n\nAfter working as a hatter in Troy, Corbett returned to New York City. He later married, but his wife and child died in childbirth. Following their deaths, he moved to Boston. Corbett became despondent over the loss of his wife and child and began drinking heavily. He was unable to hold a job and eventually became homeless. After a night of heavy drinking, he was confronted by a street preacher whose message persuaded him to join the Methodist Episcopal Church. Corbett immediately stopped drinking and became devoutly religious. After being baptized, he subsequently changed his name to Boston, the name of the city where he was converted. He regularly attended meetings at the Fulton and Bromfield Street churches where his enthusiastic behavior earned him the nickname \"The Glory to God man\". In an attempt to imitate Jesus, Corbett began to wear his hair very long (he was forced to cut it upon enlisting in the Union Army).\n\nIn 1857, Corbett began working at a hat manufacturer's shop on Washington Street in downtown Boston. He was reported to be a proficient hatter, but was known to proselytize frequently and stop work to pray and sing for co-workers who used profanity in his presence. He also began working as a street preacher and would sermonize and distribute religious literature in North Square. Corbett soon earned a reputation around Boston for being a \"local eccentric\" and religious fanatic. On July 16, 1858, Corbett was propositioned by two prostitutes while walking home from a church meeting. He was deeply disturbed by the encounter. Upon returning to his room at a boardinghouse, Corbett began reading in the Gospel of Matthew (\"And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee...and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake\"). In order to avoid sexual temptation and remain holy, he castrated himself with a pair of scissors. He then ate a meal and went to a prayer meeting before seeking medical treatment.\n\nIn April 1861, early in the American Civil War, Corbett enlisted as a private in Company I of the 12th Regiment New York Militia. Corbett's eccentric behavior quickly got him into trouble. He carried a bible with him at all times and read passages aloud from it regularly, held unauthorized prayer meetings and argued with his superior officers. Corbett also condemned officers and superiors for what he perceived as violations of God's word. In one instance, he verbally reprimanded Colonel Daniel Butterfield for using profanity and taking the Lord's name in vain. He was sent to the guardhouse for several days but refused to apologize for his insubordination. Due to his continued disruptive behavior and refusal to take orders, Corbett was court-martialed and sentenced to be shot. His sentence was eventually reduced and he was discharged in August 1863.\n\nCorbett re-enlisted later that month as a private in Company L, 16th New York Cavalry Regiment. On June 24, 1864, he was captured by Confederate Colonel John S. Mosby's men in Culpeper, Virginia and held prisoner at Andersonville prison for five months. He was released in an exchange in November 1864 and was admitted to the Army hospital in Annapolis, Maryland where he was treated for scurvy, malnutrition and exposure. On his return to his company, he was promoted to Sergeant. Corbett later testified for the prosecution in the trial of the commandant of Andersonville, Captain Henry Wirz.\n\nOn April 24, 1865, Corbett's regiment was sent to apprehend John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of President Abraham Lincoln, whom Booth fatally shot on April 14, 1865. On April 26, the regiment surrounded Booth and one of his accomplices, David Herold, in a tobacco barn on the Virginia farm of Richard Garrett. Herold surrendered, but Booth refused. The barn was set on fire in an attempt to force him out into the open, but Booth remained inside. Corbett was positioned near a large crack in the barn wall. In an 1878 interview, Corbett claimed that he saw Booth aim his carbine, prompting him to shoot Booth with his Colt revolver despite Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton's orders that Booth should be captured alive. Lieutenant Edward P. Doherty, the officer in charge of the soldiers who captured Booth and Herold, stated that \"the bullet struck Booth in the back of the head, about an inch below the spot where his shot had entered the head of Mr. Lincoln.\" Booth's spinal cord was severed, and he died two hours later.\n\nLt. Colonel Everton Conger initially thought Booth had shot himself. After realizing Booth had been shot by someone else, Conger and Lt. Doherty asked which officer had shot Booth. Corbett stepped forward and admitted he was the shooter. When asked why he had violated orders, Corbett replied, \"Providence directed me\". He was immediately arrested and was accompanied by Lt. Doherty to the War Department in Washington, D.C. to be court martialed. When questioned by Edwin Stanton about Booth's capture and shooting, both Doherty and Corbett agreed that Corbett had in fact disobeyed orders not to shoot. However, Corbett maintained that he believed Booth had intended to shoot his way out of the barn and that he acted in self-defense. He stated, \"...Booth would have killed me if I had not shot first. I think I did right.\" Stanton paused and then stated, \"The rebel is dead. The patriot lives; he has spared the country expense, continued excitement and trouble. Discharge the patriot.\" Upon leaving the War Department, Corbett was greeted by a cheering crowd. As he made his way to Mathew Brady's studio to have his official portrait taken, the crowd followed him asking for autographs and requesting that he tell them about shooting Booth. Corbett told the crowd:\n\nI aimed at his body. I did not want to kill him...I think he stooped to pick up something just as I fired. That may probably account for his receiving the ball in the head. [W]hen the assassin lay at my feet, a wounded man, and I saw the bullet had taken effect about an inch back of the ear, and I remembered that Mr. Lincoln was wounded about the same part of the head, I said: \"What a God we have...God avenged Abraham Lincoln.\"\n\nEyewitnesses to Booth's shooting contradicted Corbett's version of events and expressed doubts that Corbett was responsible for shooting Booth. Officers who were near Corbett at the time claimed that they never saw him fire his gun (Corbett's gun was never inspected and was eventually lost). They claimed that Corbett came forward only after Lt. Colonel Conger asked who had shot Booth. Richard Garrett, the owner of the farm on which Booth was captured, and his 12-year-old son Robert also contradicted Corbett's testimony that he acted in self-defense. Both maintained that Booth had never reached for his gun.\n\nWhile there was some criticism of Corbett's actions, he was largely considered a hero by the public and press. One newspaper editor declared that Corbett would, \"live as one of the World's great avengers.\" For his part in Booth's capture, Corbett received a portion of the $100,000 reward money, amounting to $1,653.84 (). His annual salary as a U.S. sergeant was $204 (). Corbett received offers to purchase the gun he used to shoot Booth. He refused stating, \"That is not mine-it belongs to the Government, and I would not sell it for any price.\" Corbett also declined an offer for one of Booth's pistols as he did not want a reminder of shooting Booth.\n\nAfter his discharge from the army in August 1865, Corbett went back to work as a hatter in Boston and frequently attended the Broomfield Street Church. When the hatting business in Boston slowed, Corbett moved to Danbury, Connecticut to continue his work and also \"preached in the country round about.\" By 1870, he had relocated once again to Camden, New Jersey where he was known as a \"Methodist lay preacher\". Corbett's inability to hold a job was attributed to his fanatical behavior; he was routinely fired after continuing his habit of stopping work to pray for his co-workers. In an effort to earn money, Corbett capitalized on his role as \"Lincoln's Avenger\". He gave lectures about the shooting of Booth accompanied by illustrated lantern slides at Sunday schools, women's groups and tent meetings. Corbett was never asked back due to his increasingly erratic behavior and incoherent speeches.\n\nR.B. Hoover, a man who later befriended Corbett, recalled that Corbett believed \"men who were high in authority at Washington at the time of the assassination\" were hounding him. Corbett said the men were angry because he had deprived them of prosecuting and executing John Wilkes Booth themselves. He also believed the same men had gotten him fired from various jobs. Corbett's paranoia was furthered by hate mail he received for killing Booth. He became fearful that \"Booth's Avengers\" or organizations like the \"Secret Order\" were planning to seek revenge upon him and took to carrying a pistol with him at all times. As his paranoia increased, Corbett began brandishing his pistol at friends or strangers he deemed suspicious.\n\nWhile attending the Soldiers' Reunion of the Blue and Gray in Caldwell, Ohio in 1875, Corbett got into an argument with several men over the death of John Wilkes Booth. The men questioned if Booth had really been killed at all which enraged Corbett. He then drew his pistol on the men but was removed from the reunion before he could fire it. In 1878, Corbett moved to Concordia, Kansas where he acquired a plot of land through homesteading upon which he constructed a dugout home. He continued working as a preacher and attended revival meetings frequently.\n\nDue to his fame as \"Lincoln's Avenger\", Corbett was appointed assistant doorkeeper of the Kansas House of Representatives in Topeka in January 1887. On February 15, he became convinced that \nofficers of the House were discriminating against him. He jumped to his feet, brandished a revolver and began chasing the officers out of the building. No one was hurt and Corbett was arrested. The following day, a judge declared Corbett insane and sent him to the Topeka Asylum for the Insane. On May 26, 1888, he escaped from the asylum on horseback. He then rode to Neodesha, Kansas where he briefly stayed with Richard Thatcher, a man he had met while they were prisoners of war. When Corbett left, he told Thatcher he was going to Mexico.\n\nRather than going to Mexico, Corbett is believed to have settled in a cabin he built in the forests near Hinckley, in Pine County in eastern Minnesota. He is believed to have died in the Great Hinckley Fire on September 1, 1894. Although there is no proof, the name \"Thomas Corbett\" appears on the list of dead and missing.\n\nIn the years following Corbett's presumed death, several men came forwarding claiming to be \"Lincoln's Avenger\". A few years after Corbett was last seen in Neodesha, Kansas, a patent medicine salesman in Enid, Oklahoma filed an application using Corbett's name to receive pension benefits. After an investigation proved that the man was not Boston Corbett, he was sent to prison. In September 1905, a man arrested in Dallas also claimed to be Corbett. He too was proven to be an impostor and was sent to prison for perjury and then to the Government Hospital for the Insane.\n\nIn 1958, Boy Scout Troop 31 of Concordia, Kansas, built a roadside monument to Corbett located on Key Road. A small sign was also placed to mark the dug hole where Corbett had lived for a time.\n\nCharacter actor Dabbs Greer portrayed a fictional version of Corbett in \"The Unmasked\", a 1962 episode of the ABC western series \"Lawman\".\n\nCorbett appears as a prominent and possibly prophetic character in Edward M. Erdelac's 2015 alternate historical horror novel \"Andersonville\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4693", "title": "Berber languages", "text": "Berber languages\n\nThe Berber languages, also known as Berber or the Amazigh languages (Berber name: , , ), are a family of similar and closely related languages and dialects spoken by the Berbers indigenous to North Africa. The Berber languages constitute a branch of the Afroasiatic family. They were traditionally written with the ancient Libyco-Berber script, which now exists in the form of Tifinagh.\n\nBerber is spoken by large populations of Algeria, Morocco and Libya and by smaller populations of Tunisia, northern Mali, western and northern Niger, northern Burkina Faso, Mauritania and in the Siwa Oasis of Egypt. Large Berber-speaking migrant communities, today numbering about 4 million, have been living in Western Europe, spanning over three generations, since the 1950s. The number of Berber people is much higher than the number of Berber speakers. The bulk of the populations of the Maghreb countries are considered to have Berber ancestors. In Algeria, for example, a majority of the population consists of Arabised Berbers.\n\nAround 90 percent of the Berber-speaking population speak one of six major varieties of Berber, each with at least two million speakers. They are, in order of number of speakers: Shilha (\"Tacelḥit/Tasussit\"), Kabyle (\"Taqbaylit\"), Central Atlas Tamazight (\"Tamaziɣt\"), Riffian (\"Tmaziɣt\"), Shawiya (\"Tacawit\") and Tuareg (\"Tamaceq/Tamajaq/Tamahaq\"). The extinct Guanche language spoken on the Canary Islands by the Guanches, as well as the languages of the ancient C-Group culture in present-day southern Egypt and northern Sudan, are believed to have belonged to the Berber branch of the Afroasiatic family.\n\nThe Berber languages and dialects have had a written tradition, on and off, for about 2,500 years, although the tradition has been frequently disrupted by cultural shifts and invasions. They were first written in the Libyco-Berber abjad, still used today by the Tuareg in the form of Tuareg Tifinagh. The oldest dated inscription is from 3rd century BCE. Later, between about 1000 CE and 1500 CE, they were written in the Arabic script, and since the 20th century they have been written in the Berber Latin alphabet, especially among the Kabyle and Riffian communities of Morocco and Algeria. The Berber Latin alphabet was also used by most European and Berber linguists during the 19th and 20th centuries.\n\nA modernised form of the Tifinagh alphabet, called Neo-Tifinagh, was adopted in Morocco in 2003 for writing Berber, but many Moroccan Berber publications still use the Berber Latin alphabet. Algerians mostly use the Berber Latin alphabet in Berber language education at public schools, while Tifinagh is mostly used for artistic symbolism. Mali and Niger recognise a Tuareg-Berber Latin alphabet customised to the Tuareg phonological system. However, traditional Tifinagh is still used in those countries.\n\nThere is a cultural and political movement among speakers of the closely related varieties of Northern Berber to promote and unify them under a written standard language called \"Tamaziɣt\". The name \"Tamaziɣt\" (or \"Tamazight\") is the current native name of the Berber language in the Moroccan Middle Atlas region, the Rif regions and the Libyan Zuwarah region. In other Berber-speaking areas this name was lost. There is historical evidence from medieval Berber manuscripts that all indigenous North Africans from Libya to Morocco have at some point called their language \"Tamaziɣt\". The name \"Tamaziɣt\" is currently being used increasingly by educated Berbers to refer to the written Berber language, and even to Berber as a whole, including Tuareg.\n\nIn 2001, Berber became a constitutional national language of Algeria, and in 2011 Berber became a constitutionally official language of Morocco. In 2016 Berber became a constitutionally official language of Algeria, after years of persecution.\n\nThe term \"Berber\" has been used in Europe since at least the 17th century, and is still used today. It was borrowed from Latin \"Barbari\". The Latin word is also found in the Arabic designation for these populations, البربر (\"al-Barbar\"), see names of the Berber people.\n\nEtymologically, the Berber root \"M-Z-Ɣ\" (\"Mazigh\") (singular noun: \"Amazigh\", feminine: \"Tamazight\") means \"free man\", \"noble man\", or \"defender\". The feminine \"Tamazight\" traditionally referred specifically to the Riffian and Central Atlas Tamazight languages. Many Berber linguists prefer to consider the term \"Tamazight\" as a pure Berber word to be used only in Berber text while using the European word \"Berber/\"Berbero\"/\"Berbère\"\" in European texts to follow the traditions of European writings about the Berbers. European languages distinguish between the words \"Berber\" and \"barbarian\", while Arabic has the same word \"al-Barbari\" for both meanings.\n\nSome other Berber writers, especially in Morocco, prefer to refer to Berber with \"Amazigh\" when writing about it in French or English.\n\nTraditionally, the term \"Tamazight\" (in various forms: \"Thamazighth\", \"Tamasheq\", \"Tamajaq\", \"Tamahaq\") was used by many Berber groups to refer to the language they spoke, including the Middle Atlas, the Riffians, the Sened in Tunisia and the Tuareg. However, other terms were used by other groups; for instance, some Berber populations of Algeria called their language \"Taznatit\" (Zenati) or \"Shelha\", while the Kabyles called theirs \"Taqbaylit\", and the inhabitants of the Siwa Oasis called their language \"Siwi\". In Tunisia, the local Amazigh language is usually referred to as \"Shelha\", a term which has been observed in Morocco as well.\n\nOne group, the Linguasphere Observatory, has attempted to introduce the neologism \"Tamazic languages\" to refer to the Berber languages.\n\nBerber is a member of the Afroasiatic language family. Since modern Berber languages are relatively homogeneous, the date of the Proto-Berber language from which the modern group is derived was probably comparatively recent, comparable to the age of the Germanic or Romance subfamilies. In contrast, the split of the group from the other Afro-Asiatic sub-phyla is much earlier, and is sometimes associated with the Mesolithic Capsian culture.\n\nVarious orthographies have been used to transcribe the Berber languages. In antiquity, the Libyco-Berber script (Tifinagh) was utilised to write Berber. Early uses of the script have been found on rock art and in various sepulchres. Among these are the 1,500 year old monumental tomb of the Tuareg matriarch Tin Hinan, where vestiges of a Tifinagh inscription have been found on one of its walls.\n\nFollowing the spread of Islam, some Berber scholars also utilised the Arabic script. There are now three writing systems in use for Berber languages: Tifinagh, the Arabic script, and the Berber Latin alphabet.\n\nAfter independence, all the Maghreb countries to varying degrees pursued a policy of Arabisation, aimed partly at displacing French from its colonial position as the dominant language of education and literacy. Under this policy the use of the Amazigh/Berber languages was suppressed or even banned. This state of affairs has been contested by Berbers in Morocco and Algeria—especially Kabylie—and was addressed in both countries by introducing the Berber language in some schools and by recognising Berber as a \"national language\" in Algeria, though not as an official one.\n\nThe 2011 constitution of Morocco makes \"Amazigh\" an official language alongside Arabic. Morocco is a country with several competing linguistically different languages, including French, Modern Standard Arabic, Moroccan Arabic and Amazigh. As the higher status of Modern Standard Arabic grew, so did the relation between the male population and the language, as well as the female population and the lower status language Amazigh. Women became the main carriers of the Amazigh language as the lower-status language in the country. In Mali and Niger, there are a few schools that teach partially in Tuareg languages.\n\nAlthough regional councils in Libya's Nafusa Mountains affiliated with the National Transitional Council reportedly use the Berber language of Nafusi and have called for it to be granted co-official status with Arabic in a prospective new constitution, Algeria and Morocco are the only countries where Tamazight is an official language.\n\nAs areas of Libya south and west of Tripoli such as the Nafusa Mountains were taken from the control of Gaddafi government forces in early summer 2011, Berber workshops and exhibitions sprang up to share and spread the Tamazight culture and language.\n\nOn 17 June 2011 King Mohammed VI announced in a speech of new constitutional reform that \"Tamazight\" became an official language of Morocco alongside Arabic and will be used in all the administrations in the future.\n\nOn 30 April 2012 Fatima Chahou, alias \"Tabaamrant\", member of the Moroccan House of Representatives and former singer became the first person to ask questions and discuss the minister's answer in Tamazight inside the Parliament of Morocco.\n\nOn 7 February 2016 the Algerian parliament recognised Berber languages as having official status along with Arabic.\n\nThe exact population of Berber speakers is hard to ascertain, since most North African countries do not record language data in their censuses. Ethnologue provides a useful academic starting point; however, its bibliographic references are very inadequate, and it rates its own accuracy at only B-C for the area. Early colonial censuses may provide better documented figures for some countries; however, these are also very much out of date.\n\n\nA survey included in the official Moroccan census of 2004 and published by several Moroccan newspapers gave the following figures: 34 percent of people in rural regions spoke a Berber language and 21 percent in urban zones did; the national average would be 28.4 percent or 8.52 million. It is possible, however, that the survey asked for the language \"used in daily life\", which would result in figures lower than those of native speakers, as the language is not recognised for official purposes and many Berbers who live in an Arabic-speaking environment cannot use it in daily life; also, the use of Berber in public was frowned upon until the 1990s, which may have affected the result of the survey.\n\nAdding up the population (according to the official census of 2004) of the Berber-speaking regions as shown on a 1973 map from the CIA results in at least 10 million speakers, not counting the numerous Berber population which lives outside these regions in the bigger cities.\n\nMoroccan linguist Mohamed Chafik claims that 80 percent of Moroccans are Berbers. It is not clear, however, whether he means \"speakers of Berber languages\" or \"people of Berber descent\".\n\nThe division of Moroccan Berber languages into three groups, as used by Ethnologue, is common in linguistic publications, but is significantly complicated by the presence of local differences: Shilha is subdivided into Shilha of the Draa River valley, Tasusit (the language of the Souss) and several other mountain languages. Moreover, linguistic boundaries are blurred, such that certain languages cannot accurately be described as either Central Morocco Tamazight (spoken in the central and eastern Atlas area) or Shilha.\n\nOther Berber languages spoken in Algeria include: the Tamazight of Blida, the languages of the Beni Snouss and Beni Boussaid villages in the province of Tlemcen, the Matmata Berber spoken in the Ouarsenis region, the Mozabite language spoken in the region of the province of Mzab and the language of the Ouargla oasis.\n\nThus, the total number of speakers of Berber languages in the Maghreb proper appears to lie anywhere between 16 and 25 million, depending on which estimate is accepted; if we take Basset's estimate, it could be as high as 30 million. The vast majority are concentrated in Morocco and Algeria. The Tuareg of the Sahel adds another million or so to the total.\n\nNouns in the Berber languages vary in gender (masculine versus feminine), number (singular versus plural) and state (free state versus construct state). In the case of the masculine, nouns generally begin with one of the three vowels of Berber, \"a\", \"u\" or \"i\" (in standardised orthography, \"e\" represents a schwa inserted for reasons of pronunciation):\n\nWhile the masculine is unmarked, the feminine (also used to form diminutives and singulatives, like an ear of wheat) is marked with the circumfix \"t...t\". Feminine plural takes a prefix \"t...\":\n\nBerber languages have two types of number: singular and plural, of which only the latter is marked. Plural has three forms according to the type of nouns. The first, \"regular\" type is known as the \"external plural\"; it consists in changing the initial vowel of the noun, and adding a suffix \"-n\":\nThe second form of the plural is known as the \"broken plural\". It involves only a change in the vowels of the word:\nThe third type of plural is a mixed form: it combines a change of vowels with the suffix \"-n\":\n\nBerber languages also have two types of states or cases of the noun, organized ergatively: one is unmarked, while the other serves for the subject of a transitive verb and the object of a preposition, among other contexts. The former is often called \"free state\", the latter \"construct state\". The construct state of the noun derives from the free state through one of the following rules:\nThe first involves a vowel alternation, whereby the vowel \"a\" becomes \"u\":\nThe second involves the loss of the initial vowel, in the case of some feminine nouns:\nThe third involves the addition of a semi-vowel (\"w\" or \"y\") word-initially:\nFinally, some nouns do not change for free state:\n\nThe following table gives the forms for the noun \"amghar\" \"old man / leader\":\n\nBerber pronouns show gender distinction in the second- and third-persons, but in verbal agreement markers, the distinction is lost in the second-person.\n\nA listing of the other Berber languages is complicated by their closeness; there is little distinction between language and dialect. The primary difficulty of subclassification, however, lies in the eastern Berber languages, where there is little agreement. Otherwise there is consensus on the outlines of the family:\n\nThe various classifications differ primarily in what they consider to be Eastern Berber, and in how many varieties they recognise as distinct languages.\n\nThere is so little data available on Guanche that any classification is necessarily uncertain; however, it is almost universally acknowledged as Afro-Asiatic on the basis of the surviving glosses, and widely suspected to be Berber. Much the same can be said of the language, sometimes called \"Numidian\", used in the Libyan or Libyco-Berber inscriptions around the turn of the Common Era, whose alphabet is the ancestor of Tifinagh.\n\nMaarten Kossmann (1999) describes Berber as two dialect continua,\nplus a few peripheral languages, spoken in isolated pockets largely surrounded by Arabic, that fall outside these continua, namely\nWithin Northern Berber, however, he recognises a break in the continuum between Zenati and their non-Zenati neighbours; and in the east, he recognises a division between Ghadamès and Awjila on the one hand and Sokna (Fuqaha, Libya), Siwa and Djebel Nefusa on the other. The implied tree is:\n\nEthnologue, mostly following Aikhenvald and Militarev (1991), treats the eastern varieties differently:\n\nBlench (ms, 2006) has the following classification:\n\nand within Berber,\n\nThe Berber languages have influenced Maghrebi Arabic languages, such as Moroccan, Algerian and Tunisian Arabic. Their influence is also seen in some languages in West Africa. F. W. H. Migeod pointed to strong resemblances between Berber and Hausa in such words and phrases as these: Berber: obanis; Hausa \"obansa\" (his father); Berber: a bat; Hausa \"ya bata\" (he was lost); Berber: eghare; Hausa \"ya kirra\" (he called). In addition he notes that the genitive in both languages is formed with n = \"of\".\n\nA number of extinct populations are believed to have spoken Afro-Asiatic languages of the Berber branch. According to Peter Behrens (1981) and Marianne Bechaus-Gerst (2000), linguistic evidence suggests that the peoples of the C-Group culture in present-day southern Egypt and northern Sudan spoke Berber languages. The Nilo-Saharan Nobiin language today contains a number of key pastoralism related loanwords that are of Berber origin, including the terms for sheep and water/Nile. This in turn suggests that the C-Group population — which, along with the Kerma culture, inhabited the Nile valley immediately before the arrival of the first Nubian speakers — spoke Afro-Asiatic languages.\n\nAdditionally, historical linguistics indicate that the Guanche language, which was spoken on the Canary Islands by the ancient Guanches, likely belonged to the Berber branch of the Afro-Asiatic family.\n\nThe Berber letter \"c\" is pronounced (like the English \"sh\").\n\nThe Berber letter \"x\" is pronounced (like the Spanish \"j\" or the German \"ch\").\n\nThe Berber letter \"ɣ\" is pronounced (like the French or German \"r\").\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4695", "title": "Bankruptcy", "text": "Bankruptcy\n\nBankruptcy is a legal status of a person or other entity that cannot repay the debts it owes to creditors. In most jurisdictions, bankruptcy is imposed by a court order, often initiated by the debtor.\n\nBankruptcy is not the only legal status that an insolvent person may have, and the term \"bankruptcy\" is therefore not a synonym for insolvency. In some countries, such as the United Kingdom, bankruptcy is limited to individuals, and other forms of insolvency proceedings (such as liquidation and administration) are applied to companies. In the United States, \"bankruptcy\" is applied more broadly to formal insolvency proceedings. In France, the cognate French word \"banqueroute\" is used solely for cases of fraudulent bankruptcy, whereas the term \"faillite\" (cognate of \"failure\") is used for bankruptcy in accordance with the law.\n\nThe word \"bankruptcy\" is derived from Italian \"banca rotta\", meaning \"broken bank\", which may stem from a widespread custom in the Republic of Genoa of breaking a moneychanger's bench or counter to signify his insolvency, or which may be only a figure of speech.\n\nIn Ancient Greece, bankruptcy did not exist. If a man owed and he could not pay, he and his wife, children or servants were forced into \"debt slavery\", until the creditor recouped losses through their physical labour. Many city-states in ancient Greece limited debt slavery to a period of five years; debt slaves had protection of life and limb, which regular slaves did not enjoy. However, servants of the debtor could be retained beyond that deadline by the creditor and were often forced to serve their new lord for a lifetime, usually under significantly harsher conditions. An exception to this rule was Athens, which by the laws of Solon forbade enslavement for debt; as a consequence, most Athenian slaves were foreigners (Greek or otherwise).\n\nThe Statute of Bankrupts of 1542 was the first statute under English law dealing with bankruptcy or insolvency. Bankruptcy is also documented in East Asia. According to al-Maqrizi, the Yassa of Genghis Khan contained a provision that mandated the death penalty for anyone who became bankrupt three times.\n\nA failure of a nation to meet bond repayments has been seen on many occasions. Philip II of Spain had to declare four state bankruptcies in 1557, 1560, 1575 and 1596. According to Kenneth S. Rogoff, \"Although the development of international capital markets was quite limited prior to 1800, we nevertheless catalog the various defaults of France, Portugal, Prussia, Spain, and the early Italian city-states. At the edge of Europe, Egypt, Russia, and Turkey have histories of chronic default as well.\"\n\nThe principal focus of modern insolvency legislation and business debt restructuring practices no longer rests on the elimination of insolvent entities, but on the remodeling of the financial and organizational structure of debtors experiencing financial distress so as to permit the rehabilitation and continuation of the business.\n\nFor private households, it is argued to be insufficient to merely dismiss debts after a certain period . It is important to assess the underlying problems and to minimize the risk of financial distress to re-occur. It has been stressed that debt advice, a supervised rehabilitation period, financial education and social help to find sources of income and to improve the management of household expenditures need to be equally provided during this period of rehabilitation (Refiner \"et al.\", 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). In most EU Member States, debt discharge is conditioned by a partial payment obligation and by a number of requirements concerning the debtor's behavior. In the United States (US), discharge is conditioned to a lesser extent. The spectrum is broad in the EU, with the UK coming closest to the US system (Reifner et al., 2003; Gerhardt, 2009; Frade, 2010). The Other Member States do not provide the option of a debt discharge. Spain, for example, passed a bankruptcy law (\"ley concurs\") in 2003 which provides for debt settlement plans that can result in a reduction of the debt (maximally half of the amount) or an extension of the payment period of maximally five years (Gerhardt, 2009), but it does not foresee debt discharge.\n\nIn the US, it is almost impossible to discharge student loan debt by filing bankruptcy. Unlike most other debtors, the individual with student debt must give a series of reasons and tests (with steps) to prove that the debtor could not pay the debt. If the person were to file bankruptcy, he or she is normally encouraged to do so under Chapter 13.\n\nIn order to avoid bankruptcy, one could negotiate with the lender to lower monthly payments, or one could seek student debt consolidation. Student loan bankruptcy is considered a last resort. However, some borrowers find themselves being forced to file bankruptcy, as the lender refused to lower payments, or to lower/freeze interest rates (which grows the debt).\n\nBankruptcy fraud is a white-collar crime. While difficult to generalize across jurisdictions, common criminal acts under bankruptcy statutes typically involve concealment of assets, concealment or destruction of documents, conflicts of interest, fraudulent claims, false statements or declarations, and fee fixing or redistribution arrangements. Falsifications on bankruptcy forms often constitute perjury. Multiple filings are not in and of themselves criminal, but they may violate provisions of bankruptcy law. In the U.S., bankruptcy fraud statutes are particularly focused on the mental state of particular actions. Bankruptcy fraud is a federal crime in the United States.\n\nBankruptcy fraud should be distinguished from \"strategic bankruptcy\", which is not a criminal act since it creates a real (not a fake) bankruptcy state. However, it may still work against the filer.\n\nAll assets must be disclosed in bankruptcy schedules whether or not the debtor believes the asset has a net value. This is because once a bankruptcy petition is filed, it is for the creditors, not the debtor, to decide whether a particular asset has value. The future ramifications of omitting assets from schedules can be quite serious for the offending debtor. In the United States, a closed bankruptcy may be reopened by motion of a creditor or the U.S. trustee if a debtor attempts to later assert ownership of such an \"unscheduled asset\" after being discharged of all debt in the bankruptcy. The trustee may then seize the asset and liquidate it for the benefit of the (formerly discharged) creditors. Whether or not a concealment of such an asset should also be considered for prosecution as fraud and/or perjury would then be at the discretion of the judge and/or U.S. Trustee.\n\nIn Argentina the national Act \"24.522 de Concursos y Quiebras\" regulates the Bankruptcy and the Reorganization of the individuals and companies, public entities are not included.\n\nIn Australia, bankruptcy is a status which applies to individuals and is governed by the federal \"Bankruptcy Act 1966\". Companies do not go bankrupt but rather go into liquidation or administration, which is governed by the federal \"Corporations Act 2001\".\n\nIf a person commits an act of bankruptcy, then a creditor can apply to the Federal Circuit Court or the Federal Court for a sequestration order. Acts of bankruptcy are defined in the legislation, and include the failure to comply with a bankruptcy notice. A bankruptcy notice can be issued where, among other cases, a person fails to pay a judgment debt. A person can also seek to have himself or herself declared bankrupt by lodging a debtor's petition with the \"Official Receiver\", which is the Australian Financial Security Authority (AFSA).\n\nTo declare bankruptcy or for a creditors petition to be lodged, the debt owed must be at least $5,000.\n\nAll bankrupts are required to lodge a Statement of Affairs document with AFSA, which includes important information about their assets and liabilities. A bankruptcy cannot be annulled until this document has been lodged.\n\nOrdinarily, a bankruptcy lasts three years from the filing of the Statement of Affairs with AFSA.\n\nA Bankruptcy Trustee (in most cases, the Official Receiver) is appointed to deal with all matters regarding the administration of the bankrupt estate. The Trustee's job includes notifying creditors of the estate and dealing with creditor inquiries; ensuring that the bankrupt complies with his or her obligations under the Bankruptcy Act; investigating the bankrupt's financial affairs; realising funds to which the estate is entitled under the Bankruptcy Act and distributing dividends to creditors if sufficient funds become available.\n\nFor the duration of their bankruptcy, all bankrupts have certain restrictions placed upon them. For example, a bankrupt must obtain the permission of his or her trustee to travel overseas. Failure to do so may result in the bankrupt being stopped at the airport by the Australian Federal Police. Additionally, a bankrupt is required to provide his or her trustee with details of income and assets. If the bankrupt does not comply with the Trustee's request to provide details of income, the trustee may have grounds to lodge an Objection to Discharge, which has the effect of extending the bankruptcy for a further five years.\n\nThe realisation of funds usually comes from two main sources: the bankrupt's assets and the bankrupt's wages. There are certain assets that are protected, referred to as \"protected assets\". These include household furniture and appliances, tools of the trade and vehicles up to a certain value. All other assets of value will be sold. If a house or car is above a certain value, the bankrupt can buy the interest back from the estate in order to keep the asset. If the bankrupt does not do this, the interest vests in the estate and the trustee is able to take possession of the asset and sell it.\n\nThe bankrupt will have to pay income contributions if his or her income is above a certain threshold. If the bankrupt fails to pay, the trustee can issue a notice to garnishee the bankrupt's wages. If that is not possible, the Trustee may seek to extend the bankruptcy for a further five years.\n\nBankruptcies can be annulled prior to the expiration of the normal three-year period if all debts are paid out in full. Sometimes a bankrupt may be able to raise enough funds to make an Offer of Composition to creditors, which would have the effect of paying the creditors some of the money they are owed. If the creditors accept the offer, the bankruptcy can be annulled after the funds are received.\n\nAfter the bankruptcy is annulled or the bankrupt has been automatically discharged, the bankrupt's credit report status will be shown as \"discharged bankrupt\" for some years. The maximum number of years this information can be held is subject to the retention limits under the Privacy Act. How long such information will be present on a credit report may be less depending on the company issuing the report, but the report must cease to record that information based on the criteria in the Privacy Act.\n\nIn Brazil, the Bankruptcy Law (11.101/05) governs court-ordered or out-of-court receivership and bankruptcy and only applies to public companies (publicly traded companies) with the exception of financial institutions, credit cooperatives, consortia, supplementary scheme entities, companies administering health care plans, equity companies and a few other legal entities. It does not apply to state-run companies.\n\nCurrent law covers three legal proceedings. The first one is bankruptcy itself (\"Falência\"). Bankruptcy is a court-ordered liquidation procedure for an insolvent business. The final goal of bankruptcy is to liquidate company assets and pay its creditors.\n\nThe second one is Court-ordered Restructuring (\"Recuperação Judicial\"). The goal is to overcome the business crisis situation of the debtor in order to allow the continuation of the producer, the employment of workers and the interests of creditors, leading, thus, to preserving company, its corporate function and develop economic activity. It's a court procedure required by the debtor which has been in business for more than two years and requires approval by a judge.\n\nThe Extrajudicial Restructuring (\"Recuperação Extrajudicial\") is a private negotiation that involves creditors and debtors and, as with court-ordered restructuring, also has to be approved by courts.\n\nBankruptcy, also referred to as insolvency in Canada, is governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act and is applicable to businesses and individuals, for example, Target Canada, the Canadian subsidiary of the Target Corporation, the second-largest discount retailer in the United States filed for bankruptcy in January 15, 2015, and closed all of its stores by April 12. The office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy, a federal agency, is responsible for overseeing that bankruptcies are administered in a fair and orderly manner by all licensed Trustees in Canada.\n\nTrustees in bankruptcy, 1041 individuals licensed to administer insolvencies, bankruptcy and proposal estates and are governed by the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act of Canada.\n\nBankruptcy is filed when a person or a company becomes insolvent and cannot pay their debts as they become due and if they have at least $1,000 in debt.\n\nIn 2011, the Superintendent of bankruptcy reported that trustees in Canada filed 127,774 insolvent estates. Consumer estates were the vast majority, with 122 999 estates. The consumer portion of the 2011 volume is divided into 77,993 bankruptcies and 45,006 consumer proposals. This represented a reduction of 8.9% from 2010. Commercial estates filed by Canadian trustees in 2011 4,775 estates, 3,643 bankruptcies and 1,132 Division 1 proposals. This represents a reduction of 8.6% over 2010.\n\nSome of the duties of the trustee in bankruptcy are to:\n\nCreditors become involved by attending creditors' meetings. The trustee calls the first meeting of creditors for the following purposes:\n\n\nIn Canada, a person can file a consumer proposal as an alternative to bankruptcy. A consumer proposal is a negotiated settlement between a debtor and their creditors.\n\nA typical proposal would involve a debtor making monthly payments for a maximum of five years, with the funds distributed to their creditors. Even though most proposals call for payments of less than the full amount of the debt owing, in most cases, the creditors will accept the deal, because if they do not, the next alternative may be personal bankruptcy, where the creditors will get even less money. The creditors have 45 days to accept or reject the consumer proposal. Once the proposal is accepted by both the creditors and the Court, the debtor makes the payments to the Proposal Administrator each month (or as otherwise stipulated in their proposal), and the general creditors are prevented from taking any further legal or collection action. If the proposal is rejected, the debtor is returned to his prior insolvent state and may have no alternative but to declare personal bankruptcy.\n\nA consumer proposal can only be made by a debtor with debts to a maximum of $250,000 (not including the mortgage on their principal residence). If debts are greater than $250,000, the proposal must be filed under Division 1 of Part III of the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. An Administrator is required in the Consumer Proposal, and a Trustee in the Division I Proposal (these are virtually the same although the terms are not interchangeable). A Proposal Administrator is almost always a licensed trustee in bankruptcy, although the Superintendent of Bankruptcy may appoint other people to serve as administrators.\n\nIn 2006, there were 98,450 personal insolvency filings in Canada: 79,218 bankruptcies and 19,232 consumer proposals.\n\nThe People's Republic of China legalized bankruptcy in 1986, and a revised law that was more expansive and complete was enacted in 2007.\n\nBankruptcy in Ireland applies only to natural persons. Other insolvency processes including liquidation and examinership are used to deal with corporate insolvency.\n\nIrish bankruptcy law has been the subject of significant comment, from both government sources and the media, as being in need of reform. Part 7 of the Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2011 has started this process and the government has committed to further reform.\n\nThe Parliament of India in the first week of May 2016 passed Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 (New Code). Earlier a clear law on corporate bankruptcy did not exist, even though individual bankruptcy laws have been in existence since 1874. The earlier law in force was enacted in 1920 called the Provincial Insolvency Act.\n\nThe legal definitions of the terms bankruptcy, insolvency, liquidation and dissolution are contested in the Indian legal system. There is no regulation or statute legislated upon bankruptcy which denotes a condition of inability to meet a demand of a creditor as is common in many other jurisdictions.\n\nWinding up of companies was in the jurisdiction of the courts which can take a decade even after the company has actually been declared insolvent. On the other hand, supervisory restructuring at the behest of the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is generally undertaken using receivership by a public entity.\n\nDutch bankruptcy law is governed by the Dutch Bankruptcy Code (\"Faillissementswet\"). The code covers three separate legal proceedings. \n\nFederal Law No. 127-FZ \"On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)\" dated 26 October 2002 (as amended) (the \"Bankruptcy Act\"), replacing the previous law in 1998, to better address the above problems and a broader failure of the action.\nRussian insolvency law is intended for a wide range of borrowers: individuals and companies of all sizes, with the exception of state-owned enterprises, government agencies, political parties and religious organizations. There are also special rules for insurance companies, professional participants of the securities market, agricultural organizations and other special laws for financial institutions and companies in the natural monopolies in the energy industry.\nFederal Law No. 40-FZ \"On Insolvency (Bankruptcy)\" dated 25 February 1999 (as amended) (the \"Insolvency Law of Credit Institutions\") contains special provisions in relation to the opening of insolvency proceedings in relation to the credit company. Insolvency Provisions Act, credit organizations used in conjunction with the provisions of the Bankruptcy Act.\n\nBankruptcy law provides for the following stages of insolvency proceedings:\n• Monitoring procedure (nablyudeniye);\n• The economic recovery (finansovoe ozdorovleniye);\n• External control (vneshneye upravleniye);\n• Liquidation (konkursnoye proizvodstvo) and\n• Amicable Agreement (mirovoye soglasheniye).\n\nThe main face of the bankruptcy process is the insolvency officer (trustee in bankruptcy, bankruptcy manager). At various stages of bankruptcy, he has to be determined: the temporary officer in Monitoring procedure, external manager in External control, the receiver or administrative officer in The economic recovery, the liquidator. During the bankruptcy trustee in bankruptcy (insolvency officer) has a decisive influence on the movement of assets (property) of the debtor - the debtor and has a key influence on the economic and legal aspects of its operations.\n\nUnder Swiss law, bankruptcy can be a consequence of insolvency. It is a court-ordered form of debt enforcement proceedings that applies, in general, to registered commercial entities only. In a bankruptcy, all assets of the debtor are liquidated under the administration of the creditors, although the law provides for debt restructuring options similar to those under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy code.\n\nIn Sweden, bankruptcy (Swedish: konkurs) is a formal process that may involve a company or individual. It is not the same as insolvency, which is inability to pay debts that should have been paid. A creditor or the company itself can apply for bankruptcy. An external bankruptcy manager will take over the company or the assets of the person, trying to sell as much as possible. A person or a company in bankruptcy can not access its assets (with some exceptions).\n\nThe formal bankruptcy process is rarely carried out for individuals. Creditors can claim money through the Enforcement Administration anyway, and creditors do not usually benefit from the bankruptcy of individuals because there are costs of a bankruptcy manager which has priority. Unpaid debts remain after bankruptcy for individuals. People who are deeply in debt can obtain a debt arrangement procedure (Swedish: skuldsanering). On application, they obtain a payment plan under which they pay as much as they can for five years, and then all remaining debts are cancelled. Debts that are derived from being subjected to a ban on business operations (issued by court, commonly for tax fraud and/or fraudulent business practices) or owed to a crime victim as compensation for damages, are exempted from this and like before this process was introduced in 2006 will remain lifelong. Debts that have not been claimed during a 3-10 year period will be cancelled. Often crime victims stop their claims after a few years since criminals often do not have job incomes and might be hard to locate, while banks make sure their claims are not cancelled. The most common reasons for personal insolvency in Sweden are illness, unemployment, divorce or company bankruptcy.\n\nFor companies, formal bankruptcy is a normal effect of insolvency, even if there is a reconstruction mechanism where the company can be given time to solve its situation, e.g. by finding an investor. The formal bankruptcy involves contracting a bankruptcy manager, who makes certain that assets are sold and money divided by the priority the law claims, and no other way. Banks have such a priority. After a finished bankruptcy for a company, it is terminated. The activities might continue in a new company which has bought important assets from the bankrupted company.\n\nBankruptcy in the United Kingdom (in a strict legal sense) relates only to individuals (including sole proprietors) and partnerships. Companies and other corporations enter into differently named legal insolvency procedures: liquidation and administration (administration order and administrative receivership). However, the term 'bankruptcy' is often used when referring to companies in the media and in general conversation. Bankruptcy in Scotland is referred to as sequestration. To apply for bankruptcy in Scotland, an individual must have more than £1500 of debt.\n\nA trustee in bankruptcy must be either an Official Receiver (a civil servant) or a licensed insolvency practitioner. Current law in England and Wales derives in large part from the Insolvency Act 1986. Following the introduction of the Enterprise Act 2002, a UK bankruptcy will now normally last no longer than 12 months and may be less, if the Official Receiver files in court a certificate that his investigations are complete. It was expected that the UK Government's liberalisation of the UK bankruptcy regime would increase the number of bankruptcy cases; initially cases increased, as the Insolvency Service statistics appear to bear out. Since 2009, the introduction of the Debt Relief Order has resulted in a dramatic fall in bankruptcies, the latest estimates for year 2014/15 being significantly less than 30,000 cases.\n\nThe UK bankruptcy law was changed in May 2000, effective May 29, 2000. Debtors may now retain occupational pensions while in bankruptcy, except in rare cases.\n\nThe Government have updated legislation (2016) to streamline the application process for UK bankruptcy. UK residents now need to apply online for bankruptcy - there is an upront fee of £655. The process for residents of Northern Ireland differs - applicants must follow the older process of applying through the courts.\n\nBankruptcy in the United States is a matter placed under federal jurisdiction by the United States Constitution (in Article 1, Section 8, Clause 4), which empowers Congress to enact \"uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States\". The Congress has enacted statutes governing bankruptcy, primarily in the form of the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code. Federal law is amplified by state law in some places where Federal law fails to speak or expressly defers to state law.\n\nWhile bankruptcy cases are always filed in United States Bankruptcy Court (an adjunct to the U.S. District Courts), bankruptcy cases, particularly with respect to the validity of claims and exemptions, are often dependent upon State law. One example: two states, Maryland and Virginia, which are adjoining states, have different personal exemption amounts that cannot be seized for payment of debts. This amount is the first $6,000 in property or cash in Maryland, but only the first $5,000 in Virginia. State law therefore plays a major role in many bankruptcy cases, and it is often not possible to generalize bankruptcy law across state lines.\n\nGenerally, a debtor declares bankruptcy to obtain relief from debt, and this is accomplished either through a discharge of the debt or through a restructuring of the debt. Generally, when a debtor files a voluntary petition, his or her bankruptcy case commences.\n\nThere are six types of bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Code, located at Title 11 of the United States Code:\n\nThe most common types of personal bankruptcy for individuals are Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. Whether a person qualifies for Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 is in part determined by income. As much as 65% of all U.S. consumer bankruptcy filings are Chapter 7 cases. Corporations and other business forms file under Chapters 7 or 11. Often called \"straight bankruptcy\" or \"simple bankruptcy,\" it allows consumers to eliminate just about all of their debts over a period of three or four months. Typically, the only debts that survive a Chapter 7 are student loans, child support obligations, some tax bills and criminal fines. Credit cards, pay day loans, personal loans, medical bills, and just about all other bills are discharged.\n\nNinety-one percent of U.S. individuals who enter bankruptcy hire an attorney to file their Chapter 7 petitions. The typical cost of an attorney is $1,170.00. Alternatives to filing with an attorney are: filing pro se, hiring a non-lawyer petition preparer, or using online software to generate the petition.\n\nIn Chapter 7, a debtor surrenders his or her non-exempt property to a bankruptcy trustee who then liquidates the property and distributes the proceeds to the debtor's unsecured creditors. In exchange, the debtor is entitled to a discharge of some debt; however, the debtor will not be granted a discharge if he or she is guilty of certain types of inappropriate behavior (e.g., concealing records relating to financial condition) and certain debts (e.g., spousal and child support and most student loans). Some taxes will not be discharged even though the debtor is generally discharged from his or her debt. Many individuals in financial distress own only exempt property (e.g., clothes, household goods, an older car, or the tools of their trade or profession) and will not have to surrender any property to the trustee. The amount of property that a debtor may exempt varies from state to state (as noted above, Virginia and Maryland have a $1,000 difference.) Chapter 7 relief is available only once in any eight-year period. Generally, the rights of secured creditors to their collateral continues even though their debt is discharged. For example, absent some arrangement by a debtor to surrender a car or \"reaffirm\" a debt, the creditor with a security interest in the debtor's car may repossess the car even if the debt to the creditor is discharged.\n\nThe 2005 amendments to the Bankruptcy Code introduced the \"means test\" for eligibility for chapter 7. An individual who fails the means test will have his or her chapter 7 case dismissed or may have to convert his or her case to a case under chapter 13.\n\nGenerally, a trustee will sell most of the debtor's assets to pay off creditors. However, certain assets of the debtor are protected to some extent. For example, Social Security payments, unemployment compensation, and limited values of equity in a home, car, or truck, household goods and appliances, trade tools, and books are protected. However, these exemptions vary from state to state.\n\nIn Chapter 13, the debtor retains ownership and possession of all of his or her assets, but must devote some portion of his or her future income to repaying creditors, generally over a period of three to five years. The amount of payment and the period of the repayment plan depend upon a variety of factors, including the value of the debtor's property and the amount of a debtor's income and expenses. Secured creditors may be entitled to greater payment than unsecured creditors.\n\nRelief under Chapter 13 is available only to individuals with regular income whose debts do not exceed prescribed limits. If the debtor is an individual or a sole proprietor, the debtor is allowed to file for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to repay all or part of the debts. Under this chapter, the debtor can propose a repayment plan in which to pay creditors over three to five years. If the monthly income is less than the state's median income, the plan will be for three years unless the court finds \"just cause\" to extend the plan for a longer period. If the debtor's monthly income is greater than the median income for individuals in the debtor's state, the plan must generally be for five years. A plan cannot exceed the five-year limitation.\n\nIn contrast to Chapter 7, the debtor in Chapter 13 may keep all of his or her property, whether or not exempt. If the plan appears feasible and if the debtor complies with all the other requirements, the bankruptcy court will typically confirm the plan and the debtor and creditors will be bound by its terms. Creditors have no say in the formulation of the plan other than to object to the plan, if appropriate, on the grounds that it does not comply with one of the Code's statutory requirements. Generally, the payments are made to a trustee who in turn disburses the funds in accordance with the terms of the confirmed plan.\n\nWhen the debtor completes payments pursuant to the terms of the plan, the court will formally grant the debtor a discharge of the debts provided for in the plan. However, if the debtor fails to make the agreed upon payments or fails to seek or gain court approval of a modified plan, a bankruptcy court will often dismiss the case on the motion of the trustee. Pursuant to the dismissal, creditors will typically resume pursuit of state law remedies to the extent a debt remains unpaid.\n\nIn Chapter 11, the debtor retains ownership and control of assets and is re-termed a \"debtor in possession\" (DIP). The debtor in possession runs the day-to-day operations of the business while creditors and the debtor work with the Bankruptcy Court in order to negotiate and complete a plan. Upon meeting certain requirements (e.g., fairness among creditors, priority of certain creditors) creditors are permitted to vote on the proposed plan. If a plan is confirmed the debtor will continue to operate and pay its debts under the terms of the confirmed plan. If a specified majority of creditors do not vote to confirm a plan, additional requirements may be imposed by the court in order to confirm the plan. Debtors filing for Chapter 11 protection a second time are known informally as \"Chapter 22\" filers.\n\nChapter 7 and Chapter 13 are the efficient bankruptcy chapters often used by most individuals. The chapters which almost always apply to consumer debtors are chapter 7, known as a \"straight bankruptcy\", and chapter 13, which involves an affordable plan of repayment. An important feature applicable to all types of bankruptcy filings is the automatic stay. The automatic stay means that the mere request for bankruptcy protection automatically halts most lawsuits, repossessions, foreclosures, evictions, garnishments, attachments, utility shut-offs, and debt collection activity.\n\nA Bankruptcy Exemption defines the property a debtor may retain and preserve through bankruptcy. Certain real and personal property can be exempted on \"Schedule C\" of a debtor's bankruptcy forms, and effectively be taken outside the debtor's bankruptcy estate. Bankruptcy exemptions are available only to individuals filing bankruptcy. There are two alternative systems that can be used to \"exempt\" property from a bankruptcy estate, federal exemptions (available in some states but not all), and state exemptions (which vary widely between states).\n\nAfter a bankruptcy petition is filed the court will schedule a hearing, called a 341 meeting or meeting of creditors, at which the bankruptcy trustee and creditors may review the petitioner's petition and its supporting schedules, question the petitioner, and challenge exemptions that they believe are not proper.\n\nThe Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act (BAPCPA) of 2005, Pub. L. No. 109-8, 119 Stat. 23 (April 20, 2005) (\"BAPCPA\"), substantially amended the Bankruptcy Code. Many provisions of BAPCPA were forcefully advocated by consumer lenders and were just as forcefully opposed by many consumer advocates, bankruptcy academics, bankruptcy judges, and bankruptcy lawyers. The enactment of BAPCPA followed nearly eight years of debate in Congress. According to the book, \"The Unwinding\", Joe Biden, Chris Dodd, and Hillary Clinton helped pass this bill. Most of the law's provisions became effective on October 17, 2005. Upon signing the bill, President Bush stated:\n\nAdvocates of BAPCPA claimed that its passage would reduce losses to creditors such as credit card companies, and that those creditors would then pass on the savings to other borrowers in the form of lower interest rates. Critics have argued that these claims turned out to be false. After BAPCPA passed, although credit card company losses decreased, prices charged to customers increased, and credit card company profits soared.\n\nAmong its many changes to consumer bankruptcy law, BAPCPA includes a \"means test\", which was intended to make it more difficult for a significant number of financially distressed individual debtors whose debts are primarily consumer debts to qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. The \"means test\" is employed in cases where an individual with primarily consumer debts has more than the average annual income for a household of equivalent size, computed over a 180-day period prior to filing. If the individual must \"take\" the \"means test\", their average monthly income over this 180-day period is reduced by a series of allowances for living expenses and secured debt payments in a very complex calculation that may or may not accurately reflect that individual's actual monthly budget. If the results of the means test show no disposable income (or in some cases a very small amount) then the individual qualifies for Chapter 7 relief. If a debtor does not qualify for relief under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code, either because of the Means Test or because Chapter 7 does not provide a permanent solution to delinquent payments for secured debts, such as mortgages or vehicle loans, the debtor may still seek relief under Chapter 13 of the Code. A Chapter 13 plan often does not require repayment to general unsecured debts, such as credit cards or medical bills.\n\nBAPCPA also requires individuals seeking bankruptcy relief to undertake credit counselling with approved counseling agencies prior to filing a bankruptcy petition and to undertake education in personal financial management from approved agencies prior to being granted a discharge of debts under either Chapter 7 or Chapter 13. Some studies of the operation of the credit counseling requirement suggest that it provides little benefit to debtors who receive the counseling because the only realistic option for many is to seek relief under the Bankruptcy Code.\n\nDuring 2004, the number of insolvencies reached all time highs in many European countries. In France, company insolvencies rose by more than 4%, in Austria by more than 10%, and in Greece by more than 20%. The increase in the number of insolvencies, however, does not indicate the total financial impact of insolvencies in each country because there is no indication of the size of each case. An increase in the number of bankruptcy cases does not necessarily entail an increase in bad debt write-off rates for the economy as a whole.\n\nBankruptcy statistics are also a trailing indicator. There is a time delay between financial difficulties and bankruptcy. In most cases, several months or even years pass between the financial problems and the start of bankruptcy proceedings. Legal, tax, and cultural issues may further distort bankruptcy figures, especially when comparing on an international basis. Two examples:\n\nThe insolvency numbers for private individuals also do not show the whole picture. Only a fraction of heavily indebted households will decide to file for insolvency. Two of the main reasons for this are the stigma of declaring themselves insolvent and the potential business disadvantage.\n\nFollowing the soar in insolvencies in the last decade, a number of European countries, such as France, Germany, Spain and Italy, began to revamp their bankruptcy laws in 2013. They modelled these new laws after the image of Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Currently, the majority of insolvency cases have ended in liquidation in Europe rather than the businesses surviving the crisis. These new law models are meant to change this; lawmakers are hoping to turn bankruptcy into a chance for restructuring rather than a death sentence for the companies.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4699", "title": "Blissymbols", "text": "Blissymbols\n\nBlissymbols or Blissymbolics was conceived as an ideographic writing system called Semantography consisting of several hundred basic symbols, each representing a concept, which can be composed together to generate new symbols that represent new concepts. Blissymbols differ from most of the world's major writing systems in that the characters do not correspond at all to the sounds of any spoken language.\n\nBlissymbols was invented by Charles K. Bliss (1897–1985), born Karl Kasiel Blitz in the Austro-Hungarian city of Czernowitz (at present the Ukrainian city of Chernivtsi), which had a mixture of different nationalities that “hated each other, mainly because they spoke and thought in different languages.” \nBliss graduated as a chemical engineer at the Vienna University of Technology, and joined an electronics company as a research chemist.\n\nAs the German Army invaded Austria in 1938, Bliss, a Jew, was sent to the concentration camps of Dachau and Buchenwald. His German wife Claire managed to get him released, and they finally became exiles in Shanghai, where Bliss had a cousin.\n\nBliss devised Blissymbols while a refugee at the Shanghai Ghetto and Sydney, from 1942 to 1949. He wanted to create an easy-to-learn international auxiliary language to allow communication between different linguistic communities. He was inspired by Chinese characters, with which he became familiar at Shanghai.\n\nBliss’s system was explained in his work \"Semantography\" (1949, 2nd ed. 1965, 3rd ed. 1978.)\nIt had several names:\nAs the “tourist explosion” took place in the 1960s, a number of researchers were looking for new standard symbols to be used at roads, stations, airports, etc. Bliss then adopted the name \"Blissymbolics\" in order that no researcher could plagiarize his system of symbols.\n\nSince the 1960s/1970s, Blissymbols have become popular as a method to teach disabled people to communicate.\nIn 1971 Shirley McNaughton started a pioneer program at the Ontario Crippled Children’s Centre (OCCC), aimed at children with cerebral palsy, from the approach of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC). According to Arika Okrent, Bliss used to complain about the way the teachers at the OCCC were using the symbols, in relation with the proportions of the symbols and other questions: for example, they used “fancy” terms like “nouns” and “verbs”, to describe what Bliss called “things” and “actions”. (2009, p. 173-4).\nThe ultimate objective of the OCCC program was to use Blissymbols as a practical way to teach the children to express themselves in their mother tongue, since the Blissymbols provided visual keys to understand the meaning of the English words, especially the abstract words.\n\nIn his work \"Semantography\" Bliss had not provided a systematic set of definitions for his symbols (there was a provisional vocabulary index instead (1965, pp. 827–67)), so McNaughton’s team might often interpret a certain symbol in a way that Bliss would later criticize as a “misinterpretation”. For example, they might interpret a tomato as a vegetable —according to the English definition of tomato— even though the ideal Blissymbol of vegetable was restricted by Bliss to just vegetables growing underground. Eventually the OCCC staff modified and adapted Bliss’s system in order to make it serve as a bridge to English. (2009, p. 189) Bliss complaints about his symbols “being abused” by the OCCC became so intense that the director of the OCCC told Bliss, on his 1974 visit, never to come back. In spite of this, in 1975 Bliss granted an exclusive world license, for use with disabled children, to the new Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton (later called Blissymbolics Communication International, BCI). Nevertheless, in 1977 Bliss claimed that this agreement was violated so that he was deprived of effective control of his symbol system.\n\nAccording to Okrent (2009, p. 190), there was a final period of conflict, as Bliss would make continuous criticisms to McNaughton often followed by apologies. Bliss finally brought his lawyers back to the OCCC, and both parts reached a settlement:\n\nBlissymbolic Communication International now claims an exclusive license from Bliss, for the use and publication of Blissymbols for persons with communication, language, and learning difficulties.\n\nThe Blissymbol method has been used in Canada, Sweden, and a few other countries. Practitioners of Blissymbolics (that is, speech and language therapists and users) maintain that some users who have learned to communicate with Blissymbolics find it easier to learn to read and write traditional orthography in the local spoken language than do users who did not know Blissymbolics.\n\nUnlike similar constructed languages like aUI, Blissymbolics was conceived as a purely visual, speech-less language, on the premise that “interlinguistic communication is mainly carried on by reading and writing”. Nevertheless, Bliss suggested that a set of international words could be adopted, so that “a kind of spoken language could be established – as a travelling aid only”. (1965, p. 89–90).\n\nSo, whether Blissymbolics constitutes an unspoken language is a controversial question, whatever its practical utility may be. Some linguists, such as John DeFrancis and J. Marshall Unger have argued that genuine ideographic writing systems with the same capacities as natural languages do not exist. It is not certain, however, that they have examined Blissymbols.\n\nBliss’s concern about semantics finds an early referent in John Locke, whose \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" prevented people from those \"vague and insignificant forms of speech\" that may give the impression of being deep learning.\n\nAnother vital referent is Leibniz’s project of an ideographic language called \"universal character\", based on the principles of Chinese characters. It would contain small figures representing \"visible things by their lines, and the invisible, by the visible which accompany them\", as well as adding \"certain additional marks, suitable to make understood the flexions and the particles.\" (1965, p. 569). Bliss stated that his own work was an attempt to take up the thread of Leibniz’s project.\n\nFinally there is a strong influence by the work \"The Meaning of Meaning\" by C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards, which was considered a standard work on semantics. Bliss found especially useful their \"triangle of reference\": the physical thing or \"referent\" that we perceive would be represented at the right angle; the meaning that we know by experience (our implicit definition of the thing), at the top angle; and the physical word that we speak or write, at the left angle. The reversed process would happen when we read or listen to words: from the words, we recall meanings, related to referents which may be real things or unreal \"fictions\". Bliss was particularly concerned with political propaganda, whose discourses would tend to contain words that correspond to unreal or ambiguous referents.\nThe grammar of Blissymbols is based on a certain interpretation of nature, dividing it into matter (material things), energy (actions), and human values (mental evaluations). In an ordinary language, these would give place respectively to substantives, verbs, and adjectives. In Blissymbols, they are marked respectively by a small square symbol, a small cone symbol, and a small V or inverted cone. These symbols may be placed above any other symbol, turning it respectively into a “thing”, an “action”, and an “evaluation”:\n\nWhen a symbol is not marked by any of the three grammar symbols (square, cone, inverted cone), they may be a non material thing, a grammatical particle, etc.\n\nThe symbol above represents the expression \"world language\", which was a first tentative name for Blissymbols.\nIt combines the symbol for \"writing tool\" or \"pen\" (a line inclined, as a pen being used) with the symbol for \"world\", which in its turn combines \"ground\" or \"earth\" (a horizontal line below) and its counterpart derivate \"sky\" (a horizontal line above). Thus the world would be seen as \"what is among the ground and the sky\", and \"Blissymbols\" would be seen as \"the writing tool to express the world\". This is clearly distinct from the symbol of \"language\", which is a combination of \"mouth\" and \"ear\". Thus natural languages are mainly oral, while Blissymbols is just a writing system dealing with semantics, not phonetics.\n\nThe 900 individual symbols of the system are called \"Bliss-characters\"; these may be \"ideographic\" – representing abstract concepts, \"pictographic\" – a direct representation of objects, or \"composite\" – in which two or more existing Bliss-characters have been superimposed to represent a new meaning. Size, orientation and relation to the \"skyline\" and \"earthline\" affects the meaning of each symbol. A single concept is called a \"Bliss-word\", which can consist of one or more Bliss-characters. In the case of multiple character Bliss-words, the main character is called the \"classifier\" which \"indicates the semantic or grammatical category to which the Bliss-word belongs\". To this can be added Bliss-characters as prefixes or suffixes called \"modifiers\" which amend the meaning of the first symbol. A further symbol, called an \"indicator\" can be added adjacent to the Bliss-word; these are used as \"grammatical and/or semantic markers.\"\nThis sentence means \"I want to go to the cinema.\" This example shows several features of Blissymbolics:\n\nAs elucidated above, Blissymbolics was used in 1971 to help children at the Ontario Crippled Children’s Centre (OCCC, now the Bloorview Kids Rehab) in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Since it was important that the children see consistent pictures, OCCC had a draftsman named Jim Grice draw the symbols. Both Charles K. Bliss and Margrit Beesley at the OCCC worked with Grice to ensure consistency. In 1975, a new organization named Blissymbolics Communication Foundation directed by Shirley McNaughton led this effort. Over the years, this organization changed its name to Blissymbolics Communication Institute, Easter Seal Communication Institute, and ultimately to Blissymbolics Communication International (BCI).\n\nBCI is an international group of people who act as an authority regarding the standardization of the Blissymbolics language. It has taken responsibility for any extensions of the Blissymbolics language as well as any maintenance needed for the language. BCI has coordinated usage of the language since 1971 for augmentative and alternative communication. BCI received a licence and copyright through legal agreements with Charles K. Bliss in 1975 and 1982. Limiting the count of Bliss-characters (there are currently about 900) is very useful in order to help the user community. It also helps when implementing Blissymbolics using technology such as computers.\n\nIn 1991, BCI published a reference guide containing 2300 vocabulary items and detailed rules for the graphic design of additional characters, so they settled a first set of approved \"Bliss-words\" for general use.\nThe Standards Council of Canada then sponsored, on January 21, 1993, the registration of an encoded character set for use in ISO/IEC 2022, in the ISO-IR international registry of coded character sets.\nAfter many years of requests, the Blissymbolic language was finally approved as an encoded language, with code zbl, into the ISO 639-2 and ISO 639-3 standards.\n\nA proposal was posted by Michael Everson for the Blissymbolics script to be included in the Universal Character Set (UCS) and encoded for use with the ISO/IEC 10646 and Unicode standards. BCI would cooperate with the Unicode Technical Committee (UTC) and the ISO Working Group.\nThe proposed encoding does not use the lexical encoding model used in the existing ISO-IR/169 registered character set, but instead applies the Unicode and ISO character-glyph model to the \"Bliss-character\" model already adopted by BCI, since this would significantly reduce the number of needed characters. Bliss-characters can now be used in a creative way to create many new arbitrary concepts, by surrounding the invented words with special Bliss indicators (similar to punctuation), something which was not possible in the ISO-IR/169 encoding.\n\nHowever, at the end of 2009, the Blissymbolic script is still not encoded in the UCS. Some questions are still unanswered, such as the inclusion in the BCI repertoire of some characters (currently about 24) that are already encoded in the UCS (like digits, punctuation signs, spaces and some markers), but whose unification may cause problems due to the very strict graphical layouts required by the published Bliss reference guides. In addition, the character metrics use a specific layout where the usual baseline is not used, and the ideographic em-square is not relevant for Bliss character designs, that use additional \"earth line\" and \"sky line\" to define the composition square. \nSome fonts supporting the BCI repertoire are available and usable with texts encoded with private-use assignments (PUA) within the UCS. But only the private BCI encoding based on ISO-IR/169 registration is available for text interchange.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4700", "title": "Bessel function", "text": "Bessel function\n\nBessel functions, first defined by the mathematician Daniel Bernoulli and then generalized by Friedrich Bessel, are the canonical solutions formula_1 of Bessel's differential equation\nfor an arbitrary complex number , the \"order\" of the Bessel function. Although and − produce the same differential equation for real , it is conventional to define different Bessel functions for these two values in such a way that the Bessel functions are mostly smooth functions of .\n\nThe most important cases are when is an integer or half-integer.\nBessel functions for integer are also known as cylinder functions or the cylindrical harmonics because they appear in the solution to Laplace's equation in cylindrical coordinates. Spherical Bessel functions with half-integer are obtained when the Helmholtz equation is solved in spherical coordinates.\n\nBessel's equation arises when finding separable solutions to Laplace's equation and the Helmholtz equation in cylindrical or spherical coordinates. Bessel functions are therefore especially important for many problems of wave propagation and static potentials. In solving problems in cylindrical coordinate systems, one obtains Bessel functions of integer order ( = \"n\"); in spherical problems, one obtains half-integer orders ( = \"n\"+1/2). For example:\n\nBessel functions also appear in other problems, such as signal processing (e.g., see FM synthesis, Kaiser window, or Bessel filter).\n\nBecause this is a second-order differential equation, there must be two linearly independent solutions. Depending upon the circumstances, however, various formulations of these solutions are convenient. Different variations are summarized in the table below, and described in the following sections.\n\nBessel functions of the second kind and the spherical Bessel functions of the second kind are sometimes denoted by \"N\" and \"n\", respectively, rather than \"Y\" and \"y\".\n\nBessel functions of the first kind, denoted as \"J\"(\"x\"), are solutions of Bessel's differential equation that are finite at the origin (\"x\" = 0) for integer or positive α, and diverge as \"x\" approaches zero for negative non-integer α. It is possible to define the function by its series expansion around \"x\" = 0, which can be found by applying the Frobenius method to Bessel's equation:\n\nwhere Γ(\"z\") is the gamma function, a shifted generalization of the factorial function to non-integer values. The Bessel function of the first kind is an entire function if is an integer, otherwise it is a multivalued function with singularity at zero. The graphs of Bessel functions look roughly like oscillating sine or cosine functions that decay proportionally to 1/√\"x\" (see also their asymptotic forms below), although their roots are not generally periodic, except asymptotically for large \"x\". (The series indicates that −\"J\"(\"x\") is the derivative of \"J\"(\"x\"), much like −sin(\"x\") is the derivative of cos(\"x\"); more generally, the derivative of \"J\"(\"x\") can be expressed in terms of \"J\"(\"x\") by the identities below.)\n\nFor non-integer , the functions \"J\"(\"x\") and \"J\"(\"x\") are linearly independent, and are therefore the two solutions of the differential equation. On the other hand, for integer order , the following relationship is valid (note that the Gamma function has simple poles at each of the non-positive integers):\n\nThis means that the two solutions are no longer linearly independent. In this case, the second linearly independent solution is then found to be the Bessel function of the second kind, as discussed below.\n\nAnother definition of the Bessel function, for integer values of \"n\", is possible using an integral representation:\n\nAnother integral representation is:\n\nThis was the approach that Bessel used, and from this definition he derived several properties of the function. The definition may be extended to non-integer orders by one of Schläfli's integrals, for formula_7:\n\nThe Bessel functions can be expressed in terms of the generalized hypergeometric series as\n\nThis expression is related to the development of Bessel functions in terms of the Bessel–Clifford function.\n\nIn terms of the Laguerre polynomials \"L\" and arbitrarily chosen parameter \"t\", the Bessel function can be expressed as\n\nThe Bessel functions of the second kind, denoted by \"Y\"(\"x\"), occasionally denoted instead by \"N\"(\"x\"), are solutions of the Bessel differential equation that have a singularity at the origin (\"x\" = 0) and are multivalued. These are sometimes called Weber functions as they were introduced by , and also Neumann functions after Carl Neumann.\n\nFor non-integer , \"Y\"(\"x\") is related to \"J\"(\"x\") by:\n\nIn the case of integer order , the function is defined by taking the limit as a non-integer tends to ,\nIf \"n\" is a nonnegative integer we have the series\n\nThere is also a corresponding integral formula (for Re() > 0),\n\n\"Y\"(\"x\") is necessary as the second linearly independent solution of the Bessel's equation when α is an integer. But \"Y\"(\"x\") has more meaning than that. It can be considered as a 'natural' partner of \"J\"(\"x\"). See also the subsection on Hankel functions below.\n\nWhen is an integer, moreover, as was similarly the case for the functions of the first kind, the following relationship is valid:\n\nBoth \"J\"(\"x\") and \"Y\"(\"x\") are holomorphic functions of on the complex plane cut along the negative real axis. When is an integer, the Bessel functions are entire functions of . If is held fixed at a non-zero value, then the Bessel functions are entire functions of .\n\nThe Bessel functions of the second kind when is an integer is an example of the second kind of solution in Fuchs's theorem.\n\nAnother important formulation of the two linearly independent solutions to Bessel's equation are the Hankel functions of the first and second kind, \"H\"(\"x\") and \"H\"(\"x\"), defined by:\n\nwhere \"i\" is the imaginary unit. These linear combinations are also known as Bessel functions of the third kind; they are two linearly independent solutions of Bessel's differential equation. They are named after Hermann Hankel.\n\nThe importance of Hankel functions of the first and second kind lies more in theoretical development rather than in application. These forms of linear combination satisfy numerous simple-looking properties, like asymptotic formulae or integral representations. Here, 'simple' means an appearance of the factor of the form \"e\". The Bessel function of the second kind then can be thought to naturally appear as the imaginary part of the Hankel functions.\n\nThe Hankel functions are used to express outward- and inward-propagating cylindrical wave solutions of the cylindrical wave equation, respectively (or vice versa, depending on the sign convention for the frequency).\n\nUsing the previous relationships they can be expressed as:\n\nIf α is an integer, the limit has to be calculated. The following relationships are valid, whether α is an integer or not:\n\nIn particular, if = \"m\" + 1/2 with \"m\" a nonnegative integer, the above relations imply directly that\n\nThese are useful in developing the spherical Bessel functions (below).\n\nThe Hankel functions admit the following integral representations for Re(\"x\") > 0:\n\nwhere the integration limits indicate integration along a contour that can be chosen as follows: from −∞ to 0 along the negative real axis, from 0 to ±iπ along the imaginary axis, and from ±iπ to +∞±iπ along a contour parallel to the real axis.\n\nThe Bessel functions are valid even for complex arguments , and an important special case is that of a purely imaginary argument. In this case, the solutions to the Bessel equation are called the modified Bessel functions (or occasionally the hyperbolic Bessel functions) of the first and second kind, and are defined by:\n\nwhen is not an integer; when is an integer, then the limit is used. These are chosen to be real-valued for real and positive arguments . The series expansion for is thus similar to that for , but without the alternating (−1) factor.\n\nIf can be expressed as a Hankel function of the first kind:\nand if , it can be expressed as a Hankel function of the second kind:\n\nWe can express the first and second Bessel functions in terms of the modified Bessel functions (these are valid if ),\n\nUnlike the ordinary Bessel functions, which are oscillating as functions of a real argument, \"I\" and \"K\" are exponentially growing and decaying functions, respectively. Like the ordinary Bessel function \"J\", the function \"I\" goes to zero at = 0 for > 0 and is finite at = 0 for = 0. Analogously, \"K\" diverges at  = 0 with the singularity being of logarithmic type.\n\nTwo integral formulas for the modified Bessel functions are (for Re(\"x\") > 0):\n\nIn some calculations in physics, it can be useful to know that the following relation holds:\n\nIt can be proven by showing equality to the above integral definition for \"K\". This is done by integrating a closed curve in the first quadrant of the complex plane.\n\nModified Bessel functions \"K\" and \"K\" can be represented in terms of rapidly converged integrals\n\nThe modified Bessel function of the second kind has also been called by the now-rare names:\n\nWhen solving the Helmholtz equation in spherical coordinates by separation of variables, the radial equation has the form:\n\nThe two linearly independent solutions to this equation are called the spherical Bessel functions \"j\" and \"y\", and are related to the ordinary Bessel functions \"J\" and \"Y\" by:\n\n\"y\" is also denoted \"n\" or η; some authors call these functions the spherical Neumann functions.\n\nThe spherical Bessel functions can also be written as (Rayleigh's formulas):\n\nThe first spherical Bessel function \"j\"(\"x\") is also known as the (unnormalized) sinc function. The first few spherical Bessel functions are:\nand\n\nThe spherical Bessel functions have the generating functions \n\nIn the following \"f\" is any of formula_53 for formula_54\n\nThere are also spherical analogues of the Hankel functions:\n\nIn fact, there are simple closed-form expressions for the Bessel functions of half-integer order in terms of the standard trigonometric functions, and therefore for the spherical Bessel functions. In particular, for non-negative integers \"n\":\n\nand formula_60 is the complex-conjugate of this (for real \"x\"). It follows, for example, that formula_61 and formula_62, and so on.\n\nThe spherical Hankel functions appear in problems involving spherical wave propagation, for example in the multipole expansion of the electromagnetic field.\n\nRiccati–Bessel functions only slightly differ from spherical Bessel functions:\n\nThey satisfy the differential equation:\n\nFor example, this kind of differential equation appears in Quantum Mechanics while solving the radial component of the Schrödinger's Equation with hypothetical cylindrical infinite potential barrier. For reference see p. 154, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics by Griffiths, 2nd Edition. This differential equation, and the Riccati–Bessel solutions, also arises in the problem of scattering of electromagnetic waves by a sphere, known as Mie scattering after the first published solution by Mie (1908). See e.g., Du (2004) for recent developments and references.\n\nFollowing Debye (1909), the notation formula_68 is sometimes used instead of formula_69.\n\nThe Bessel functions have the following asymptotic forms. For small arguments formula_70, one obtains, when α is not a negative integer:\n\nWhen α is a negative integer, we have:\n\nFor the Bessel function of the second kind we have three cases:\n\nwhere γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant (0.5772...).\n\nFor large real arguments formula_74, one cannot write a true asymptotic form for Bessel functions of the first and second kind (unless α is half-integer) because they have zeros all the way out to infinity which would have to be matched exactly by any asymptotic expansion. However, for a given value of arg(\"z\") one can write an equation containing a term of order |\"z\"|:\n\n(For α = 1/2 the last terms in these formulas drop out completely; see the spherical Bessel functions above.) Even though these equations are true, better approximations may be available for complex \"z\". For example, \"J\"(\"z\") when \"z\" is near the negative real line is approximated better by\n\nthan by\n\nThe asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions are:\n\nThese can be extended to other values of arg(\"z\") using equations relating formula_79 and formula_80 to \"H\"(\"z\") and \"H\"(\"z\").\nIt is interesting that although the Bessel function of the first kind is the average of the two Hankel functions, \"J\"(\"z\") is not asymptotic to the average of these two asymptotic forms when \"z\" is negative (because one or the other will not be correct there, depending on the arg(\"z\") used). But the asymptotic forms for the Hankel functions permit us to write asymptotic forms for the Bessel functions of first and second kinds for complex (non-real) \"z\" so long as |\"z\"| goes to infinity at a constant phase angle arg \"z\" (using the square root having positive real part):\n\nFor the modified Bessel functions, Hankel developed asymptotic expansions as well:\n\nWhen α = 1/2 all the terms except the first vanish and we have\n\nFor small arguments formula_85, we have:\n\nFor integer order = \"n\", \"J\" is often defined via a Laurent series for a generating function:\n\nan approach used by P. A. Hansen in 1843. (This can be generalized to non-integer order by contour integration or other methods.) Another important relation for integer orders is the \"Jacobi–Anger expansion\":\n\nand\n\nwhich is used to expand a plane wave as a sum of cylindrical waves, or to find the Fourier series of a tone-modulated FM signal.\n\nMore generally, a series\n\nis called Neumann expansion of \"ƒ\". The coefficients for ν = 0 have the explicit form\n\nwhere \"O\" is Neumann's polynomial.\n\nSelected functions admit the special representation\n\nwith\n\ndue to the orthogonality relation\n\nMore generally, if \"ƒ\" has a branch-point near the origin of such a nature that\n\nthen\n\nor\n\nwhere formula_99 is \"f\"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Laplace transform.\n\nAnother way to define the Bessel functions is the Poisson representation formula and the Mehler-Sonine formula:\n\nwhere ν > −1/2 and \"z\" ∈ C.\nThis formula is useful especially when working with Fourier transforms.\n\nBecause Bessel's equation becomes Hermitian (self-adjoint) if it is divided by \"x\", the solutions must satisfy an orthogonality relationship for appropriate boundary conditions. In particular, it follows that:\n\nwhere α > −1, δ is the Kronecker delta, and \"u\" is the \"m\"-th zero of \"J\"(\"x\"). This orthogonality relation can then be used to extract the coefficients in the Fourier–Bessel series, where a function is expanded in the basis of the functions \"J\"(\"x\" \"u\") for fixed α and varying \"m\".\n\nAn analogous relationship for the spherical Bessel functions follows immediately:\n\nIf one defines a boxcar function of \"x\" that depends on a small parameter ε as:\n\n(where rect() is the rectangle function) then the Hankel transform of it (of any given order α greater than −1/2), \"g\"(\"k\"), approaches \"J\"(\"k\") as ε approaches zero, for any given \"k\". Conversely, the Hankel transform (of the same order) of \"g\"(\"k\") is \"f\"(\"x\"):\n\nwhich is zero everywhere except near 1. As ε approaches zero, the right-hand side approaches δ(\"x\"−1), where δ is the Dirac delta function. So by abuse of language (or \"formally\"), one says that\n\neven though the integral on the left is not actually defined. A change of variables then yields the \"closure equation\":\n\nfor α > −1/2. The Hankel transform can express a fairly arbitrary function as an integral of Bessel functions of different scales. For the spherical Bessel functions the orthogonality relation is:\n\nfor α > −1. Again, this is a useful formal equation whose left-hand side is not actually defined.\n\nAnother important property of Bessel's equations, which follows from Abel's identity, involves the Wronskian of the solutions:\n\nwhere \"A\" and \"B\" are any two solutions of Bessel's equation, and \"C\" is a constant independent of \"x\" (which depends on α and on the particular Bessel functions considered). In particular,\nand\n\nfor α > −1. \nFor α > −1, the even entire function of genus 1, formula_111, has only real zeros. Let \nbe all its positive zeros, then\n\nThe functions \"J\", \"Y\", \"H\", and \"H\" all satisfy the recurrence relations:\n\nwhere \"Z\" denotes \"J\", \"Y\", \"H\", or \"H\". (These two identities are often combined, e.g. added or subtracted, to yield various other relations.) In this way, for example, one can compute Bessel functions of higher orders (or higher derivatives) given the values at lower orders (or lower derivatives). In particular, it follows that:\n\n\"Modified\" Bessel functions follow similar relations :\n\nand\n\nThe recurrence relation reads\n\nwhere \"C\" denotes \"I\" or \"e\"\"K\". These recurrence relations are useful for discrete diffusion problems.\n\nThe Bessel functions obey a multiplication theorem\n\nwhere λ and ν may be taken as arbitrary complex numbers, see. The above expression also holds if formula_123 is replaced by formula_124. The analogous identities for modified Bessel functions are\n\nand\n\nBessel himself originally proved that for non-negative integers \"n\", the equation \"J\"(\"x\") = 0 has an infinite number of solutions in \"x\". When the functions \"J\"(\"x\") are plotted on the same graph, though, none of the zeros seem to coincide for different values of \"n\" except for the zero at \"x\" = 0. This phenomenon is known as Bourget's hypothesis after the nineteenth-century French mathematician who studied Bessel functions. Specifically it states that for any integers \"n\" ≥ 0 and \"m\" ≥ 1, the functions \"J\"(\"x\") and \"J\"(\"x\") have no common zeros other than the one at \"x\" = 0. The hypothesis was proved by Carl Ludwig Siegel in 1929.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4702", "title": "Brahui language", "text": "Brahui language\n\nBrahui () is a Dravidian language spoken by the Baloch and Brahui people in the central part of Baluchistan province in Pakistan, as well as in scattered parts of Afghanistan, and by expatriate Brahui communities in Qatar, United Arab Emirates, Iraq, and Iran. It is isolated from the nearest Dravidian-speaking neighbour population of South India by a distance of more than . Kalat, Mastung Khuzdar and parts of Quetta districts of Balochistan are predominantly Brahui-speaking.\n\nBrahui is spoken in the central part of Pakistani Balochistan, mainly in Kalat, Mastung, and Khuzdar districts but also in smaller numbers in neighboring districts, as well as in Afghanistan which borders Pakistani Balochistan; however, many members of the ethnic group no longer speak Brahui. The 2013 edition of Ethnologue reports that there are some 4 million speakers. Nearly all live in Pakistan, mainly in the province of Balochistan. There are also an unknown very small number of expatriate Brahuis in the Arab States of the Persian Gulf, Iranian Balochistan, and Turkmenistan.\n\nBrahui belongs, with Kurukh (Oraon) and Malto, to the northern subfamily of the Dravidian family of languages. It has been influenced by the Iranian languages spoken in the area, especially Balochi.\n\nThere are no important dialectical differences. Jhalawani (southern, centered on Khuzdar) and Sarawani (northern, centered on Kalat) dialects are distinguished by the pronunciation of *h, which is only retained in the north. (Elfenbein 1997)\n\nThe vowels are the same as Balochi: long \"a e i o u\", short \"a i u\", diphthongs \"aj, aw\". Stress has also been borrowed from Balochi, and occurs on the first long vowel or diphthong, or on the first syllable if all vowels are short.\n\nConsonants are also very similar to those of Balochi, but Brahui has more fricatives and nasals (Elfenbein 1993).\n\nBrahui is the only Dravidian language which is not known to have been written in a Brahmi-based script; instead, it is written in the Arabic script since the second half of the 20th century. More recently, a Roman-based orthography named Brolikva (an abbreviation of \"Brahui Roman Likvar\") was developed by the Brahui Language Board of the University of Balochistan in Quetta, and adopted by the newspaper Talár.\n\nBelow is the new promoted Bráhuí Báşágal Brolikva orthography:\n\nThe letters with diacritics are the long vowels, post-alveolar and retroflex consonants, the voiced velar fricative and the voiceless lateral fricative.\n\nAccording to a 2009 UNESCO report, Brahui is one of the 27 languages of Pakistan that are facing the danger of extinction. They classify it in \"unsafe\" status, the least endangered level out of the five levels of concern (Unsafe, Definitely Endangered, Severely Endangered, Critically Endangered, and Extinct).\n\nTalár is the first daily newspaper in the Brahui language. It uses the new Roman orthography, and is \"an attempt to standardize and develop [the] Brahui language to meet the requirements of modern political, social and scientific discourse.\"\n\nThere is no consensus as to whether Brahui is a relatively recent language introduced into Balochistan or remnant of an older widespread Dravidian language family. According to Josef Elfenbein (1989), the most common theory is that the Brahui were part of a Dravidian invasion of north-western India in 3rd millennium BC, but unlike other Dravidians who migrated to the south, they remained in Sarawan and Jahlawan since before 2000 BC. However, some other scholars see it as a recent migrant language to its present region. They postulate, that Brahui could only have migrated to Balochistan from central India after 1000 CE. The absence of any older Iranian (Avestan) loanwords in Brahui supports this hypothesis. The main Iranian contributor to Brahui vocabulary, Balochi, is a Northwestern Iranian language, and moved to the area from the west only around 1000 CE. One scholar places the migration as late as the 13th or 14th century.\n\n"}
{"id": "4706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4706", "title": "Berkeley DB", "text": "Berkeley DB\n\nBerkeley DB (BDB) is a software library intended to provide a high-performance embedded database for key/value data. Berkeley DB is written in C with API bindings for C++, C#, Java, Perl, PHP, Python, Ruby, Smalltalk, Tcl, and many other programming languages. BDB stores arbitrary key/data pairs as byte arrays, and supports multiple data items for a single key. Berkeley DB is not a relational database.\n\nBDB can support thousands of simultaneous threads of control or concurrent processes manipulating databases as large as 256 terabytes, on a wide variety of operating systems including most Unix-like and Windows systems, and real-time operating systems. \n\nBDB was commercially supported and developed by Sleepycat Software from 1996 to 2006. This company was acquired by Oracle Corporation in February 2006, which continues to develop and sell Berkeley DB. Under Oracle's stewardship, \"Berkeley DB\" has become a common brand name for three distinct products: Oracle Berkeley DB, Berkeley DB Java Edition, and Berkeley DB XML. These three products all share a common ancestry and are currently under active development.\n\nBerkeley DB originated at the University of California, Berkeley as part of BSD, Berkeley's version of the Unix operating system. After 4.3BSD (1986), the BSD developers attempted to remove or replace all code originating in the original AT&T Unix from which BSD was derived. In doing so, they needed to rewrite the Unix database package. Seltzer and Yigit created a new database, unencumbered by any AT&T patents: an on-disk hash table that outperformed the existing Dbm libraries. Berkeley DB itself was first released in 1991 and later included with 4.4BSD. In 1996 Netscape requested that the authors of Berkeley DB improve and extend the library, then at version 1.86, to suit Netscape's requirements for an LDAP server and for use in the Netscape browser. That request led to the creation of Sleepycat Software. This company was acquired by Oracle Corporation in February 2006, which continues to develop and sell Berkeley DB.\n\nSince its initial release, Berkeley DB has gone through various versions. Each major release cycle has introduced a single new major feature generally layering on top of the earlier features to add functionality to the product. The 1.x releases focused on managing key/value data storage and are referred to as \"Data Store\" (DS). The 2.x releases added a locking system enabling concurrent access to data. This is what is known as \"Concurrent Data Store\" (CDS). The 3.x releases added a logging system for transactions and recovery, called \"Transactional Data Store\" (TDS). The 4.x releases added the ability to replicate log records and create a distributed highly available single-master multi-replica database. This is called the \"High Availability\" (HA) feature set. Berkeley DB's evolution has sometimes led to minor API changes or log format changes, but very rarely have database formats changed. Berkeley DB HA supports online upgrades from one version to the next by maintaining the ability to read and apply the prior release's log records.\n\nThe FreeBSD and OpenBSD operating systems continue to use Berkeley DB 1.8x for compatibility reasons; Linux-based operating systems commonly include several versions to accommodate for applications still using older interfaces/files.\n\nStarting with the 6.0/12c releases, all Berkeley DB products are licensed under the GNU AGPL. Berkeley DB JE 7.3.7 is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 . Previously Berkeley DB was redistributed under the 4-clause BSD license (before version 2.0), and the Sleepycat Public License, which is an OSI-approved open-source license as well as an FSF-approved free software license. The product ships with complete source code, build script, test suite, and documentation. The code quality and general utility along with the licensing terms have led to its use in a multitude of free and open-source software. Those who do not wish to abide by the terms of the GNU AGPL, or use an older version with the Sleepycat Public License, have the option of purchasing another proprietary license for redistribution from Oracle Corporation. This technique is called dual licensing. Different versions of Berkeley DB (DB, JE, XML) may have different licensing terms.\n\nBerkeley DB includes compatibility interfaces for some historic Unix database libraries: dbm, ndbm and hsearch (a System V library for creating in-memory hash tables).\n\nBerkeley DB has an architecture notably simpler than that of other database systems like relational database management systems. For example, like SQLite, it does not provide support for network access programs access the database using in-process API calls. Oracle added support for SQL in 11g R2 release based on the popular SQLite API by including a version of SQLite in Berkeley DB. There is third party support for PL/SQL in Berkeley DB via a commercial product named Metatranz StepSqlite.\n\nA program accessing the database is free to decide how the data is to be stored in a record. Berkeley DB puts no constraints on the record's data. The record and its key can both be up to four gigabytes long.\n\nDespite having a simple architecture, Berkeley DB supports many advanced database features such as ACID transactions, fine-grained locking, hot backups and replication.\n\nThe name \"Berkeley DB\" is given to three different products:\n\n\nEach edition has separate database libraries, despite the common branding. The first is the traditional Berkeley DB, written in C. It contains several database implementations, including a B-tree and one built around extensible hashing. It supports multiple language bindings, including C/C++, Java (via JNI), C# .NET, Perl and Python.\n\nBerkeley DB Java Edition (JE) is a pure Java database management library. Its design resembles that of Berkeley DB without replicating it exactly, and has a feature set that includes many of those found in the traditional Berkeley DB and others that are specific to the Java Edition. It has a log structured storage architecture, which gives it different performance and concurrency characteristics. Three APIs are available a Direct Persistence Layer which is \"Plain Old Java Objects\" (POJO); one which is based on the Java Collections Framework (an object persistence approach); and one based on the traditional Berkeley DB API. The Berkeley DB Java Edition High Availability option (Replication) is available. Note that traditional Berkeley DB also supports a Java API, but it does so via JNI and thus requires an installed native library.\n\nThe Berkeley DB XML database specializes in the storage of XML documents, supporting XQuery via XQilla. It is implemented as an additional layer on top of (a legacy version of) Berkeley DB and the Xerces library. DB XML is written in C++ and supports multiple language bindings, including C++, Java (via JNI), Perl and Python.\n\nBerkeley DB provides the underlying storage and retrieval system of several LDAP servers, database systems, and many other proprietary and free/open source applications. Notable software that use Berkeley DB for data storage include:\n\n\n\nOracle Corporation makes versions 2.0 and higher of Berkeley DB available under a dual license. The Sleepycat license is a 2-clause BSD license with an additional copyleft clause similar to the GNU GPL version 2's Section 3, requiring source code of an application using Berkeley DB to be made available for a nominal fee. Oracle Berkeley DB JE 7.3.7 is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 .\n\nSleepycat License (sometimes referred to as Berkeley Database License or the Sleepycat Public License) is an OSI-approved open source license used by Oracle Corporation for the open-source editions of Berkeley DB, Berkeley DB Java Edition and Berkeley DB XML embedded database products older than version 6.0.20. It was controversial due to the different treatment received from the Free Software Foundation, (that qualifies as a free software license, and is compatible with the GPL), while the Apache Foundation does not consider it an acceptable license, for their libraries (or own code), along with other copyleft ones;\n\nAs of Berkeley DB release 6.0.20, the Oracle Corporation has relicensed Berkeley DB under the GNU AGPL. Oracle Berkeley DB JE 7.3.7 is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.\n\n, Oracle's list price for non-copyleft Berkeley DB licenses varies between US$900 and 13,800 per processor. Embedded usage within the Oracle Retail Predictive Application Server (RPAS) does not require an additional license payment.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4715", "title": "Boolean satisfiability problem", "text": "Boolean satisfiability problem\n\nIn computer science, the Boolean satisfiability problem (sometimes called Propositional Satisfiability Problem and abbreviated as SATISFIABILITY or SAT) is the problem of determining if there exists an interpretation that satisfies a given Boolean formula. In other words, it asks whether the variables of a given Boolean formula can be consistently replaced by the values TRUE or FALSE in such a way that the formula evaluates to TRUE. If this is the case, the formula is called \"satisfiable\". On the other hand, if no such assignment exists, the function expressed by the formula is FALSE for all possible variable assignments and the formula is \"unsatisfiable\". For example, the formula \"\"a\" AND NOT \"b\"\" is satisfiable because one can find the values \"a\" = TRUE and \"b\" = FALSE, which make (\"a\" AND NOT \"b\") = TRUE. In contrast, \"\"a\" AND NOT \"a\"\" is unsatisfiable.\n\nSAT is the first problem that was proven to be NP-complete; see Cook–Levin theorem. This means that all problems in the complexity class NP, which includes a wide range of natural decision and optimization problems, are at most as difficult to solve as SAT. There is no known algorithm that efficiently solves each SAT problem, and it is generally believed that no such algorithm exists; yet this belief has not been proven mathematically, and resolving the question whether SAT has a polynomial-time algorithm is equivalent to the P versus NP problem, which is a famous open problem in the theory of computing.\n\nNevertheless, as of 2016, heuristical SAT-algorithms are able to solve problem instances involving tens of thousands of variables and formulas consisting of millions of symbols, which is sufficient for many practical SAT problems from e.g. artificial intelligence, circuit design, and automatic theorem proving.\n\nA propositional logic formula, also called Boolean expression, is built from variables, operators AND (conjunction, also denoted by ∧), OR (disjunction, ∨), NOT (negation, ¬), and parentheses.\nA formula is said to be satisfiable if it can be made TRUE by assigning appropriate logical values (i.e. TRUE, FALSE) to its variables.\nThe Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) is, given a formula, to check whether it is satisfiable.\nThis decision problem is of central importance in various areas of computer science, including theoretical computer science, complexity theory, algorithmics, cryptography and artificial intelligence.\n\nThere are several special cases of the Boolean satisfiability problem in which the formulas are required to have a particular structure.\nA literal is either a variable, then called positive literal, or the negation of a variable, then called negative literal.\nA clause is a disjunction of literals (or a single literal).\nA clause is called a Horn clause if it contains at most one positive literal.\nA formula is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) if it is a conjunction of clauses (or a single clause).\nFor example, is a positive literal, is a negative literal, is a clause, and is a formula in conjunctive normal form, its 1st and 3rd clause are Horn clauses, but its 2nd clause is not. The formula is satisfiable, choosing \"x\" = FALSE, \"x\" = FALSE, and \"x\" arbitrarily, since (FALSE ∨ ¬FALSE) ∧ (¬FALSE ∨ FALSE ∨ \"x\") ∧ ¬FALSE evaluates to (FALSE ∨ TRUE) ∧ (TRUE ∨ FALSE ∨ \"x\") ∧ TRUE, and in turn to TRUE ∧ TRUE ∧ TRUE (i.e. to TRUE). In contrast, the CNF formula \"a\" ∧ ¬\"a\", consisting of two clauses of one literal, is unsatisfiable, since for \"a\"=TRUE and \"a\"=FALSE it evaluates to TRUE ∧ ¬TRUE (i.e. to FALSE) and FALSE ∧ ¬FALSE (i.e. again to FALSE), respectively.\n\nFor some versions of the SAT problem,\n\nit is useful to define the notion of a generalized conjunctive normal form formula, viz. as a conjunction of arbitrarily many generalized clauses, the latter being of the form for some boolean operator \"R\" and (ordinary) literals . Different sets of allowed boolean operators lead to different problem versions.\n\nAs an example, \"R\"(¬\"x\",\"a\",\"b\") is a generalized clause, and \"R\"(¬\"x\",\"a\",\"b\") ∧ \"R\"(\"b\",\"y\",\"c\") ∧ \"R\"(\"c\",\"d\",¬\"z\") is a generalized conjunctive normal form. This formula is used below, with \"R\" being the ternary operator that is TRUE just if exactly one of its arguments is.\nUsing the laws of Boolean algebra, every propositional logic formula can be transformed into an equivalent conjunctive normal form, which may, however, be exponentially longer. For example, transforming the formula\ninto conjunctive normal form yields\nwhile the former is a disjunction of \"n\" conjunctions of 2 variables, the latter consists of 2 clauses of \"n\" variables.\n\nSAT was the first known NP-complete problem, as proved by Stephen Cook at the University of Toronto in 1971 and independently by Leonid Levin at the National Academy of Sciences in 1973. Until that time, the concept of an NP-complete problem did not even exist.\nThe proof shows how every decision problem in the complexity class NP can be reduced to the SAT problem for CNF formulas, sometimes called CNFSAT.\nA useful property of Cook's reduction is that it preserves the number of accepting answers. For example, deciding whether a given graph has a 3-coloring is another problem in NP; if a graph has 17 valid 3-colorings, the SAT formula produced by the Cook–Levin reduction will have 17 satisfying assignments.\n\nNP-completeness only refers to the run-time of the worst case instances. Many of the instances that occur in practical applications can be solved much more quickly. See Algorithms for solving SAT below.\n\nSAT is trivial if the formulas are restricted to those in disjunctive normal form, that is, they are disjunction of conjunctions of literals. Such a formula is indeed satisfiable if and only if at least one of its conjunctions is satisfiable, and a conjunction is satisfiable if and only if it does not contain both \"x\" and NOT \"x\" for some variable \"x\". This can be checked in linear time. Furthermore, if they are restricted to being in full disjunctive normal form, in which every variable appears exactly once in every conjunction, they can be checked in constant time (each conjunction represents one satisfying assignment). But it can take exponential time and space to convert a general SAT problem to disjunctive normal form; for an example exchange \"∧\" and \"∨\" in the above exponential blow-up example for conjunctive normal forms.\n\nLike the satisfiability problem for arbitrary formulas, determining the satisfiability of a formula in conjunctive normal form where each clause is limited to at most three literals is NP-complete also; this problem is called 3-SAT, 3CNFSAT, or 3-satisfiability.\nTo reduce the unrestricted SAT problem to 3-SAT, transform each clause to a conjunction of \"n\" − 2 clauses\nwhere are fresh variables not occurring elsewhere.\nAlthough the two formulas are not logically equivalent, they are equisatisfiable. The formula resulting from transforming all clauses is at most 3 times as long as its original, i.e. the length growth is polynomial.\n\n3-SAT is one of Karp's 21 NP-complete problems, and it is used as a starting point for proving that other problems are also NP-hard. This is done by polynomial-time reduction from 3-SAT to the other problem. An example of a problem where this method has been used is the clique problem: given a CNF formula consisting of \"c\" clauses, the corresponding graph consists of a vertex for each literal, and an edge between each two non-contradicting literals from different clauses, cf. picture. The graph has a \"c\"-clique if and only if the formula is satisfiable.\n\nThere is a simple randomized algorithm due to Schöning (1999) that runs in time (4/3) where \"n\" is the number of variables in the 3-SAT proposition, and succeeds with high probability to correctly decide 3-SAT.\n\nThe exponential time hypothesis asserts that no algorithm can solve 3-SAT (or indeed \"k\"-SAT for any \"k > 2\") in time that is fundamentally faster than .\n\nSelman, Mitchell, and Levesque (1996) give empirical data on the difficulty of randomly generated 3-SAT formulas, depending on their size parameters.\nDifficulty is measured in number recursive calls made by a DPLL algorithm.\n\n3-satisfiability can be generalized to k-satisfiability (k-SAT, also k-CNF-SAT), when formulas in CNF are considered with each clause containing up to \"k\" literals.\nHowever, since for any \"k\"≥3, this problem can neither be easier than 3-SAT nor harder than SAT, and the latter two are NP-complete, so must be k-SAT.\n\nSome authors restrict k-SAT to CNF formulas with exactly k literals. This doesn't lead to a different complexity class either, as each clause with \"j\"<\"k\" literals can be padded with fixed dummy variables to\nAfter padding all clauses, 2-1 extra clauses have to be appended to ensure that only can lead to a satisfying assignment. Since \"k\" doesn't depend on the formula length, the extra clauses lead to a constant increase in length. For the same reason, it does not matter whether duplicate literals are allowed in clauses (like e.g. ), or not.\n\nA variant of the 3-satisfiability problem is the one-in-three 3-SAT (also known variously as 1-in-3-SAT and exactly-1 3-SAT).\nGiven a conjunctive normal form, the problem is to determine whether there exists a truth assignment to the variables so that each clause has \"exactly\" one TRUE literal (and thus exactly two FALSE literals). In contrast, ordinary 3-SAT requires that every clause has \"at least\" one TRUE literal.\nFormally, a one-in-three 3-SAT problem is given as a generalized conjunctive normal form with all generalized clauses using a ternary operator \"R\" that is TRUE just if exactly one of its arguments is. When all literals of a one-in-three 3-SAT formula are positive, the satisfiability problem is called one-in-three positive 3-SAT.\n\nOne-in-three 3-SAT, together with its positive case, is listed as NP-complete problem \"LO4\" in the standard reference, \"Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness\"\nby Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. One-in-three 3-SAT was proved to be NP-complete by Thomas J. Schaefer as a special case of Schaefer's dichotomy theorem, which asserts that any problem generalizing Boolean satisfiability in a certain way is either in the class P or is NP-complete.\n\nSchaefer gives a construction allowing an easy polynomial-time reduction from 3-SAT to one-in-three 3-SAT. Let \"(\"x\" or \"y\" or \"z\")\" be a clause in a 3CNF formula. Add six fresh boolean variables \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", \"e\", and \"f\", to be used to simulate this clause and no other.\n\nThen the formula \"R\"(\"x\",\"a\",\"d\") ∧ \"R\"(\"y\",\"b\",\"d\") ∧ \"R\"(\"a\",\"b\",\"e\") ∧ \"R\"(\"c\",\"d\",\"f\") ∧ \"R\"(\"z\",\"c\",FALSE) is satisfiable by some setting of the fresh variables if and only if at least one of \"x\", \"y\", or \"z\" is TRUE, see picture (left). Thus any 3-SAT instance with \"m\" clauses and \"n\" variables may be converted into an equisatisfiable one-in-three 3-SAT instance with 5\"m\" clauses and \"n\"+6\"m\" variables.\nAnother reduction involves only four fresh variables and three clauses: \"R\"(¬\"x\",\"a\",\"b\") ∧ \"R\"(\"b\",\"y\",\"c\") ∧ R(\"c\",\"d\",¬\"z\"), see picture (right).\n\nSAT is easier if the number of literals in a clause is limited to at most 2, in which case the problem is called 2-SAT. This problem can be solved in polynomial time, and in fact is complete for the complexity class NL. If additionally all OR operations in literals are changed to XOR operations, the result is called exclusive-or 2-satisfiability, which is a problem complete for the complexity class SL = L.\n\nThe problem of deciding the satisfiability of a given conjunction of Horn clauses is called Horn-satisfiability, or HORN-SAT.\nIt can be solved in polynomial time by a single step of the Unit propagation algorithm, which produces the single minimal model of the set of Horn clauses (w.r.t. the set of literals assigned to TRUE).\nHorn-satisfiability is P-complete. It can be seen as P's version of the Boolean satisfiability problem.\nAlso, deciding the truth of quantified Horn formulas can be done in polynomial time.\nHorn clauses are of interest because they are able to express implication of one variable from a set of other variables. Indeed, one such clause ¬\"x\" ∨ ... ∨ ¬\"x\" ∨ \"y\" can be rewritten as \"x\" ∧ ... ∧ \"x\" → \"y\", that is, if \"x\"...,\"x\" are all TRUE, then \"y\" needs to be TRUE as well.\n\nA generalization of the class of Horn formulae is that of renamable-Horn formulae, which is the set of formulae that can be placed in Horn form by replacing some variables with their respective negation.\nFor example, (\"x\" ∨ ¬\"x\") ∧ (¬\"x\" ∨ \"x\" ∨ \"x\") ∧ ¬\"x\" is not a Horn formula, but can be renamed to the Horn formula (\"x\" ∨ ¬\"x\") ∧ (¬\"x\" ∨ \"x\" ∨ ¬\"y\") ∧ ¬\"x\" by introducing \"y\" as negation of \"x\".\nIn contrast, no renaming of (\"x\" ∨ ¬\"x\" ∨ ¬\"x\") ∧ (¬\"x\" ∨ \"x\" ∨ \"x\") ∧ ¬\"x\" leads to a Horn formula.\nChecking the existence of such a replacement can be done in linear time; therefore, the satisfiability of such formulae is in P as it can be solved by first performing this replacement and then checking the satisfiability of the resulting Horn formula.\n\nAnother special case is the class of problems where each clause contains XOR (i.e. exclusive or) rather than (plain) OR operators.\nThis is in P, since an XOR-SAT formula can also be viewed as a system of linear equations mod 2, and can be solved in cubic time by Gaussian elimination; see the box for an example. This recast is based on the kinship between Boolean algebras and Boolean rings, and the fact that arithmetic modulo two forms a finite field. Since \"a\" XOR \"b\" XOR \"c\" evaluates to TRUE if and only if exactly 1 or 3 members of {\"a\",\"b\",\"c\"} are TRUE, each solution of the 1-in-3-SAT problem for a given CNF formula is also a solution of the XOR-3-SAT problem, and in turn each solution of XOR-3-SAT is a solution of 3-SAT, cf. picture. As a consequence, for each CNF formula, it is possible to solve the XOR-3-SAT problem defined by the formula, and based on the result infer either that the 3-SAT problem is solvable or that the 1-in-3-SAT problem is unsolvable.\n\nProvided that the complexity classes P and NP are not equal, neither 2-, nor Horn-, nor XOR-satisfiability is NP-complete, unlike SAT.\n\nThe restrictions above (CNF, 2CNF, 3CNF, Horn, XOR-SAT) bound the considered formulae to be conjunctions of subformulae; each restriction states a specific form for all subformulae: for example, only binary clauses can be subformulae in 2CNF.\n\nSchaefer's dichotomy theorem states that, for any restriction to Boolean operators that can be used to form these subformulae, the corresponding satisfiability problem is in P or NP-complete. The membership in P of the satisfiability of 2CNF, Horn, and XOR-SAT formulae are special cases of this theorem.\n\nAn extension that has gained significant popularity since 2003 is Satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) that can enrich CNF formulas with linear constraints, arrays, all-different constraints, uninterpreted functions, \"etc.\" Such extensions typically remain NP-complete, but very efficient solvers are now available that can handle many such kinds of constraints.\n\nThe satisfiability problem becomes more difficult if both \"for all\" (∀) and \"there exists\" (∃) quantifiers are allowed to bind the Boolean variables.\nAn example of such an expression would be ; it is valid, since for all values of \"x\" and \"y\", an appropriate value of \"z\" can be found, viz. \"z\"=TRUE if both \"x\" and \"y\" are FALSE, and \"z\"=FALSE else.\nSAT itself (tacitly) uses only ∃ quantifiers.\nIf only ∀ quantifiers are allowed instead, the so-called tautology problem is obtained, which is co-NP-complete.\nIf both quantifiers are allowed, the problem is called the quantified Boolean formula problem (QBF), which can be shown to be PSPACE-complete. It is widely believed that PSPACE-complete problems are strictly harder than any problem in NP, although this has not yet been proved. Using highly parallel \"P systems\", QBF-SAT problems can be solved in linear time.\n\nOrdinary SAT asks if there is at least one variable assignment that makes the formula true. A variety of variants deal with the number of such assignments:\n\nOther generalizations include satisfiability for first- and second-order logic, constraint satisfaction problems, 0-1 integer programming.\n\nThe SAT problem is self-reducible, that is, each algorithm which correctly answers if an instance of SAT is solvable can be used to find a satisfying assignment. First, the question is asked on the given formula Φ. If the answer is \"no\", the formula is unsatisfiable. Otherwise, the question is asked on the partly instantiated formula Φ{\"x\"=TRUE}, i.e. Φ with the first variable \"x\" replaced by TRUE, and simplified accordingly. If the answer is \"yes\", then \"x\"=TRUE, otherwise \"x\"=FALSE. Values of other variables can be found subsequently in the same way. In total, \"n\"+1 runs of the algorithm are required, where \"n\" is the number of distinct variables in Φ.\n\nThis property of self-reducibility is used in several theorems in complexity theory:\n\nSince the SAT problem is NP-complete, only algorithms with exponential worst-case complexity are known for it. In spite of this, efficient and scalable algorithms for SAT were developed over the last decade and have contributed to dramatic advances in our ability to automatically solve problem instances involving tens of thousands of variables and millions of constraints (i.e. clauses). Examples of such problems in electronic design automation (EDA) include formal equivalence checking, model checking, formal verification of pipelined microprocessors, automatic test pattern generation, routing of FPGAs, planning, and scheduling problems, and so on. A SAT-solving engine is now considered to be an essential component in the EDA toolbox.\n\nThere are two classes of high-performance algorithms for solving instances of SAT in practice: the Conflict-Driven Clause Learning algorithm, which can be viewed as a modern variant of the DPLL algorithm (well known implementations include Chaff and GRASP) and stochastic local search algorithms, such as WalkSAT.\n\nA DPLL SAT solver employs a systematic backtracking search procedure to explore the (exponentially sized) space of variable assignments looking for satisfying assignments. The basic search procedure was proposed in two seminal papers in the early 1960s (see references below) and is now commonly referred to as the Davis–Putnam–Logemann–Loveland algorithm (\"DPLL\" or \"DLL\"). Theoretically, exponential lower bounds have been proved for the DPLL family of algorithms.\n\nIn contrast, randomized algorithms like the PPSZ algorithm by Paturi, Pudlak, Saks, and Zane set variables in a random order according to some heuristics, for example bounded-width resolution. If the heuristic can't find the correct setting, the variable is assigned randomly. The PPSZ algorithm has a runtime of formula_1 for 3-SAT with a single satisfying assignment. Currently this is the best-known runtime for this problem. In the setting with many satisfying assignments the randomized algorithm by Schöning has a better bound.\n\nModern SAT solvers (developed in the last ten years) come in two flavors: \"conflict-driven\" and \"look-ahead\". Conflict-driven solvers augment the basic DPLL search algorithm with efficient conflict analysis, clause learning, non-chronological backtracking (a.k.a. backjumping), as well as \"two-watched-literals\" unit propagation, adaptive branching, and random restarts. These \"extras\" to the basic systematic search have been empirically shown to be essential for handling the large SAT instances that arise in electronic design automation (EDA). Look-ahead solvers have especially strengthened reductions (going beyond unit-clause propagation) and the heuristics, and they are generally stronger than conflict-driven solvers on hard instances (while conflict-driven solvers can be much better on large instances which actually have an easy instance inside).\n\nModern SAT solvers are also having significant impact on the fields of software verification, constraint solving in artificial intelligence, and operations research, among others. Powerful solvers are readily available as free and open source software. In particular, the conflict-driven MiniSAT, which was relatively successful at the 2005 SAT competition, only has about 600 lines of code. A modern Parallel SAT solver is ManySAT. It can achieve super linear speed-ups on important classes of problems. An example for look-ahead solvers is march_dl, which won a prize at the 2007 SAT competition.\n\nCertain types of large random satisfiable instances of SAT can be solved by survey propagation (SP). Particularly in hardware design and verification applications, satisfiability and other logical properties of a given propositional formula are sometimes decided based on a representation of the formula as a binary decision diagram (BDD).\n\nAlmost all SAT solvers include time-outs, so they will terminate in reasonable time even if they cannot find a solution.\nDifferent SAT solvers will find different instances easy or hard, and some excel at proving unsatisfiability, and others at finding solutions.\nAll of these behaviors can be seen in the SAT solving contests.\n\n\nReferences are ordered by date of publication:\n\n\nA SAT problem is often described in the DIMACS-CNF format: an input file in which each line represents a single disjunction. For example, a file with the two lines\nrepresents the formula \"(\"x\" ∨ ¬\"x\" ∨ \"x\") ∧ (¬\"x\" ∨ \"x\" ∨ \"x\" ∨ \"x\")\".\n\nAnother common format for this formula is the 7-bit ASCII representation \"(x1 | ~x5 | x4) & (~x1 | x5 | x3 | x4)\".\n\n\n\n\n\n\nSAT solving in general:\n\n\nMore information on SAT:\n\n\"This article includes material from a column in the ACM SIGDA e-newsletter by Prof. Karem Sakallah \nOriginal text is available here\"\n"}
{"id": "4716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4716", "title": "Bohemian", "text": "Bohemian\n\nA Bohemian () is a resident of Bohemia, a region of the Czech Republic or the former Kingdom of Bohemia, a region of the former Crown of Bohemia (lands of the Bohemian Crown). In English, the word \"Bohemian\" was used to denote the Czech people as well as the Czech language before the word \"Czech\" became prevalent in the early 20th century.\n\nIn a separate meaning, \"Bohemian\" may also denote \"a socially unconventional person, especially one who is involved in the arts\" according to Oxford Dictionaries Online. (See Bohemianism).\n\nThe name \"Bohemia\" derives from the name of the Boii, a Celtic tribe who inhabited that area towards the later La Tène period. The toponym \"Boiohaemum,\" first attested by Tacitus, is commonly taken to mean \"home of the Boii\" (from the Germanic root *\"haima-\" meaning \"world, home\"). The word \"Bohemian\" has never been widely used by the local Czech population. In Czech, the region since the early Middle Ages has been called \"Čechy\" but also, especially during the period of restoration/emancipation of the Czech language and nation, as \"Čechie.\" Another term, stressing the importance of the state/nation, is \"Království české\" (\"Czech Kingdom\") in Czech, or \"Böhmen\" (Königreich) in German. Its mainly Czech-speaking inhabitants were called \"Čechové\" (in modern Czech \"Češi\").\n\nIn most other Western European vernaculars and in Latin (as \"Bohemi\"), the word \"Bohemian\" or a derivate was used. If the Czech ethnic origin was to be stressed, combinations such as \"Bohemian of Bohemian language\" (\"Čech českého jazyka\"), \"a real Bohemian\" (\"pravý Čech\"), etc. were used.\n\nIt was not until the 19th century that other European languages began to use words related to \"Czechs\" (as in English, \"Tschechen\" in German, \"Tchèques\" in French) in a deliberate (and successful) attempt to distinguish between ethnic Slavic-speaking Bohemians and other inhabitants of Bohemia. The latter were mostly ethnic Germans, who identified as \"German Bohemians\" (\"Deutschböhmen\") or simply as \"Bohemians\" (\"Böhmen\"). In many parts of Europe, state citizenship was not identical with ethnicity and language, and the various peoples were usually identified by their language. Ethnic boundaries in Bohemia were not always sharp, and people very often were bilingual. Intermarriages across language borders were also common. Native Czech speakers often spoke German and many native German speakers spoke Czech with varying fluency, particularly in areas with many Czech speakers.\n\nCurrently, the word \"Bohemians\" is sometimes used when speaking about persons from Bohemia of all ethnic origins, especially before the year 1918, when the Kingdom of Bohemia ceased to exist. It is also used to distinguish between inhabitants of the western part (Bohemia proper) of the state, and the eastern (Moravia) or north-eastern (Silesia) parts.\n\nThe term \"Bohemianism\" was associated with \"a socially unconventional person, especially one who is involved in the arts\", that comes from the French \"bohémien.\".\n\nBohemians : style and design\n\n"}
{"id": "4717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4717", "title": "Bob Jones University", "text": "Bob Jones University\n\nBob Jones University (BJU) is a private, non-denominational Protestant university in Greenville, South Carolina, United States, known for its conservative cultural and religious positions. It has approximately 2,800 students, and it is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Colleges (SACSCOC) and the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. In 2008, the university estimated the number of its graduates at 35,000, in 2017, 40,000. The university's athletic teams, the Bruins, compete in Division II of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA).\n\nDuring the Fundamentalist-Modernist controversy of the 1920s, Christian evangelist Bob Jones, Sr. grew increasingly concerned about the secularization of higher education and the influence of religious liberalism in denominational colleges. Children of church members were attending college, only to reject the faith of their parents. Jones later recalled that in 1924, his friend William Jennings Bryan had leaned over to him at a Bible conference service in Winona Lake, Indiana, and said, \"If schools and colleges do not quit teaching evolution as a fact, we are going to become a nation of atheists.\" While he himself was not a college graduate, Jones grew determined to found a college, and on September 12, 1927, he opened Bob Jones College in Panama City, with 88 students. Jones said that although he had been averse to naming the school after himself, his friends overcame his reluctance \"with the argument that the school would be called by that name because of my connection with it, and to attempt to give it any other name would confuse the people.\"\n\nBob Jones took no salary from the college and helped support the school with personal savings and income from his evangelistic campaigns. Both time and place were inauspicious. The Florida land boom had peaked in 1925, and a hurricane in September 1926 further reduced land values. The Great Depression followed hard on its heels. Bob Jones College barely survived bankruptcy and its move to Cleveland, Tennessee in 1933. However, Jones's move to Cleveland proved extraordinarily advantageous. Bankrupt at the nadir of the Depression, without a home, and with barely enough money to move its library and office furniture, the college became in thirteen years the largest liberal arts college in Tennessee. With the enactment of GI Bill at the end of World War II, the college was virtually forced to seek a new location and build a new campus.\n\nThough he had served as Acting President as early as 1934, Jones' son, Bob Jones, Jr. officially became the school's second president in 1947 just before the college moved to Greenville, South Carolina, and became Bob Jones University. In Greenville, the university more than doubled in size within two years and started its own radio station, film department, and art gallery—the latter of which eventually became one of the largest collections of religious art in the Western Hemisphere.\n\nDuring the late 1950s, BJU and alumnus Billy Graham, who had attended Bob Jones College for one semester and received an honorary degree from the university in 1948, engaged in a controversy about the propriety of theological conservatives cooperating with theological liberals to support evangelistic campaigns, a controversy that widened an already growing rift between separatist fundamentalists and other evangelicals. Negative publicity caused by the dispute precipitated a decline in BJU enrollment of about 10% in the years 1956–59, and seven members of the university board (of about a hundred) also resigned in support of Graham, including Graham himself and two of his staff members. When, in 1966, Graham held his only American campaign in Greenville, the university forbade any BJU dormitory student from attending under penalty of expulsion. Enrollment quickly rebounded, and by 1970, there were 3300 students, approximately 60% more than in 1958.\n\nIn 1971, Bob Jones III became president at age 32, though his father, with the title of Chancellor, continued to exercise considerable administrative authority into the late 1990s. At the 2005 commencement, Stephen Jones was installed as the fourth president, and Bob Jones III assumed the title of chancellor. Stephen Jones resigned in 2014 for health reasons, and Steve Pettit was named president, the first unrelated to the Jones family.\n\nIn December 2011, in response to accusations of mishandling of student reports of sexual abuse (most of which had occurred in their home churches when the students were minors) and a concurrent reporting issue at a church pastored by a university board member, the BJU board of trustees hired an independent ombudsman, GRACE (Godly Response to Abuse in the Christian Environment), to investigate. Released in December 2014, the GRACE report suggested that BJU had discouraged students from reporting past sexual abuse, and though the University declined to implement many of the report's recommendations, President Steve Pettit formally apologized \"to those who felt they did not receive from us genuine love, compassion, understanding, and support after suffering sexual abuse or assault. We did not live up to your expectations. We failed to uphold and honor our own core values. We are deeply saddened to hear that we added to the pain and suffering.\"\n\nIn 2011, the university became a member of the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools (TRACS) and reinstated intercollegiate athletics. In 2013, it replaced the \"BJ\" logo that had been used since 1967 with a new shield logo based on the university crest. In March 2017 the university regained its federal tax exemption after a complicated restructuring divided the organization into for-profit and non-profit entities, and in June it was granted accreditation by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.\n\nAlthough BJU had admitted Asians and other ethnic groups from its inception, it did not enroll Africans or African-American students until 1971. From 1971 to 1975, BJU admitted only married blacks, although the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had already determined in 1970 that \"private schools with racially discriminatory admissions policies\" were not entitled to federal tax exemption. In 1975, the University Board of Trustees authorized a change in policy to admit black students, a move that occurred shortly before the announcement of the Supreme Court decision in \"Runyon v. McCrary\" (427 U.S. 160 [1976]), which prohibited racial exclusion in private schools. However, in May of that year, BJU expanded rules against interracial dating and marriage.\n\nIn 1976, the Internal Revenue Service revoked the university's tax exemption retroactively to December 1, 1970 on grounds that it was practicing racial discrimination. The case eventually was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1982. After BJU lost the decision in \"Bob Jones University v. United States\" (461 U.S. 574)[1983], the university chose to maintain its interracial dating policy and pay a million dollars in back taxes. The year following the Court decision, contributions to the university declined by 13 percent. In 2000, following a media uproar prompted by the visit of presidential candidate George W. Bush to the university, Bob Jones III dropped the university's interracial dating rule, announcing the change on CNN's \"Larry King Live\". In the same year, Bob Jones III drew criticism when he reposted a letter on the university's web page referring to Mormons and Catholics as being members of \"cults which call themselves Christian\".\n\nIn 2005, Stephen Jones, great-grandson of the founder, became BJU's president on the same day that he received his Ph.D. from the school. Bob Jones III then took the title Chancellor. In 2008, the university declared itself \"profoundly sorry\" for having allowed \"institutional policies to remain in place that were racially hurtful\". That year BJU enrolled students from fifty states and nearly fifty countries, representing diverse ethnicities and cultures, and the BJU administration declared itself \"committed to maintaining on the campus the racial and cultural diversity and harmony characteristic of the true Church of Jesus Christ throughout the world\".\n\nIn his first meeting with the University cabinet in 2014, the fifth president Steve Pettit said he believed it was appropriate for BJU to regain its tax-exempt status because BJU no longer held its earlier positions about race. \"The Bible is clear,\" said Pettit, \"We are made of one blood.\" By February 17, 2017, the IRS website had listed the university as a 501(c)(3) organization, and by May of the same year, BJU had forged a working relationship with Greenville's Phillis Wheatley Center.\n\nAs a twelve-year-old, Bob Jones, Sr. made a twenty-minute speech in defense of the Populist Party. Jones was a friend and admirer of William Jennings Bryan but also campaigned throughout the South for Herbert Hoover (and against Al Smith) during the 1928 presidential election. Even the authorized history of BJU notes that both Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. “played political hardball” when dealing with the three municipalities in which the school was successively located. For instance, in 1962, Bob Jones, Sr. warned the Greenville City Council that he had “four hundred votes in his pocket and in any election he would have control over who would be elected.” \n\nBob Jones, Sr.'s April 17, 1960, Easter Sunday sermon, broadcast on the radio, entitled \"Is Segregation Scriptural?\" served as the University position paper on race in the 60s, 70s and 80s. The transcript was sent in pamphlet form in fund-raising letters and sold in the University book store. In the sermon, Jones states \"If you are against segregation and against racial separation, then you are against God Almighty.\" The school began a long history of supporting politicians who were considered aligned with racial segregation.\n\nFrom nearly the inception of Bob Jones College, a majority of students and faculty were from the northern United States, where there was a larger ratio of Republicans to Democrats than in the South (which was solidly Democratic). Therefore, almost from its founding year, BJU had a larger portion of Republicans than the surrounding community. After South Carolina Senator Strom Thurmond switched his allegiance to the Republican Party in 1964, BJU faculty members became increasingly influential in the new state Republican party, and BJU alumni were elected to local political and party offices. In 1976, candidates supported by BJU faculty and alumni captured the local Republican party with unfortunate short-term political consequences, but by 1980 the religious right and the \"country club\" Republicans had joined forces. From then on, most Republican candidates for local and statewide offices sought the endorsement of Bob Jones III and greeted faculty/staff voters at the University Dining Common.\n\nNational Republicans soon followed. Ronald Reagan spoke at the school in 1980, although the Joneses supported his opponent, John Connally, in the South Carolina primary. Later, Bob Jones III denounced Reagan as \"a traitor to God's people\" for choosing George H. W. Bush—whom Jones called a \"devil\"—as his vice president. Even later, Jones III shook Bush's hand and thanked him for being a good president. In the 1990s, other Republicans such as Dan Quayle, Pat Buchanan, Phil Gramm, Bob Dole, and Alan Keyes also spoke at BJU. Democrats were rarely invited to speak at the university, in part because they took political and social positions (especially support for abortion rights) opposed by the Religious Right.\n\nOn February 2, 2000, George W. Bush, as candidate for President, spoke during school's chapel hour. Bush gave a standard stump speech making no specific reference to the university. His political opponents quickly noted his non-mention of the university's ban on interracial dating. During the Michigan primary, Bush was also criticized for not stating his opposition to the university's anti-Catholicism. (The John McCain campaign targeted Catholics with a \"Catholic Voter Alert,\" phone calls reminding voters of Bush's visit to BJU.) Bush denied that he either knew of or approved what he regarded as BJU's intolerant policies. On February 26, Bush issued a formal letter of apology to Cardinal John Joseph O'Connor of New York for failing to denounce Bob Jones University's history of anti-Catholic statements. At a news conference following the letter's release, Bush said, \"I make no excuses. I had an opportunity and I missed it. I regret that...I wish I had gotten up then and seized the moment to set a tone, a tone that I had set in Texas, a positive and inclusive tone.\" Also during the 2000 Republican primary campaign in South Carolina, Richard Hand, a BJU professor, spread a false e-mail rumor that John McCain had fathered an illegitimate child. (The McCains have an adopted daughter from Bangladesh, and later push polling also implied that the child was biracial.)\n\nAlthough the March 2007 issue of \"Foreign Policy\" listed BJU as one of \"The World's Most Controversial Religious Sites\" because of its past influence on American politics, BJU has seen little political controversy since Stephen Jones became president. When asked by a \"Newsweek\" reporter if he wished to play a political role, Stephen Jones replied, \"It would not be my choice.\" Further, when asked if he felt ideologically closer to his father's engagement with politics or to other evangelicals who have tried to avoid civic involvement, he answered, \"The gospel is for individuals. The main message we have is to individuals. We’re not here to save the culture.\" In a 2005 \"Washington Post\" interview, Jones dodged political questions and even admitted that he was embarrassed by \"some of the more vitriolic comments\" made by his predecessors. \"I don't want to get specific,\" he said, \"But there were things said back then that I wouldn't say today.\" In October 2007 when Bob Jones III, as \"a private citizen,\" endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination for president, Stephen Jones made it clear that he wished \"to stay out of politics\" and that neither he nor the university had endorsed anyone. Despite a hotly contested South Carolina primary, none of the candidates appeared on the platform of BJU's Founders' Memorial Amphitorium during the 2008 election cycle. In April 2008 Stephen Jones told a reporter, \"I don't think I have a political bone in my body.\"\n\nIn 2015 BJU reemerged as campaign stop of significance for conservative Republicans. Ben Carson and Ted Cruz held large on-campus rallies on two successive days in November; and BJU president Steve Pettit met with Marco Rubio, Rick Perry, Mike Huckabee, and Scott Walker. Jeb Bush, Carson, Cruz, and Rubio also appeared at a 2016 Republican presidential forum at BJU. Chip Felkel, a Greenville Republican consultant, noted that some of the candidates closely identified \"with the folks at Bob Jones. So it makes sense for them to want to be there.\" Nevertheless, unlike BJU's earlier periods of political involvement, Pettit did not endorse a candidate.\n\nAccording to Furman University political science professor Jim Guth, because Greenville has grown so much recently, it is unlikely BJU will ever again have the same political influence it had between the 1960s and the 1980s. Nevertheless, about a quarter of all BJU graduates continue to live in the Upstate, and as long-time mayor Knox White has said, \"The alumni have had a big impact on every profession and walk of life in Greenville.\"\n\nThe university occupies 205 acres at the eastern city limit of Greenville. The institution moved into its initial 25 buildings during the 1947–48 school year, and later buildings were also faced with the light yellow brick chosen for the originals.\n\nBob Jones, Jr. was a connoisseur of European art and began collecting after World War II on about $30,000 a year authorized by the University Board of Directors. Jones first concentrated on the Italian Baroque, a style then out of favor and relatively inexpensive in the years immediately following the war. Fifty years after the opening of the gallery, the BJU collection included more than 400 European paintings from the 14th to through the 19th centuries (mostly pre-19th century), period furniture, and a notable collection of Russian icons. The museum also includes a variety of Holy Land antiquities collected in the early 20th century by missionaries Frank and Barbara Bowen.\nNot surprisingly, the gallery is especially strong in Baroque paintings and includes notable works by Rubens, Tintoretto, Veronese, Cranach, Gerard David, Murillo, Mattia Preti, Ribera, van Dyck, and Gustave Doré. Included in the Museum & Gallery collection are seven very large canvases, part of a series by Benjamin West painted for George III, called \"The Progress of Revealed Religion\", which are displayed in the War Memorial Chapel. (Baroque art was created during—and often for—the Counter-Reformation and so, ironically, BJU has been criticized by some other fundamentalists for promoting \"false Catholic doctrine\" through its art gallery.)\n\nAfter the death of Bob Jones, Jr., Erin Jones, the wife of BJU president Stephen Jones, became director. According to David Steel, curator of European art at the North Carolina Museum of Art, Erin Jones \"brought that museum into the modern era\", employing \"a top-notch curator, John Nolan\", and following \"best practices in conservation and restoration\". The museum now regularly cooperates with other institutions, lending works for outside shows such as a Rembrandt exhibit in 2011.\n\nEach Easter season, the university and the Museum & Gallery present the \"Living Gallery\", a series of tableaux vivants recreating noted works of religious art using live models disguised as part of two-dimensional paintings.\n\nIn 2008, the BJU Museum & Gallery opened a satellite location, the \"Museum & Gallery at Heritage Green\" near downtown Greenville, which featured rotating exhibitions from the main museum as well as interactive children's activities. In February 2017, the Museum & Gallery closed the satellite location permanently and closed the campus location indefinitely for a major renovation of the exhibit space.\n\nThe Mack Library (named for John Sephus Mack) holds a collection of more than 300,000 books and includes seating for 1,200 as well as a computer lab and a computer classroom. (Its ancillary, a music library, is included in the Gustafson Fine Arts Center.) Mack Library's Special Collections includes an American Hymnody Collection of about 700 titles. The \"Jerusalem Chamber\" is a replica of the room in Westminster Abbey in which work on the King James Version of the Bible was conducted, and it displays a collection of rare Bibles. An adjoining Memorabilia Room commemorates the life of Bob Jones, Sr. and the history of the University.\n\nThe library's Fundamentalism File collects periodical articles and ephemera about social and religious matters of interest to evangelicals and fundamentalists. The university Archives holds copies of all university publications, oral histories of faculty and staff members, surviving remnants of university correspondence, and pictures and artifacts related to the Jones family and the history of the university.\n\nThe university consists of seven colleges and schools that offer more than 60 undergraduate majors, including fourteen associate degree programs. Given that BJU's faculty is untenured, most University employees consider their positions as much ministries as jobs. It is common for retiring professors to have served the university for thirty, forty, and even occasionally, fifty years, a circumstance that has contributed to the stability and conservatism of an institution of higher learning that has virtually no endowment and at which faculty salaries are \"sacrificial\".\n\nThe School of Religion includes majors for both men and women, although only men train as ministerial students. Many of these students go on to a seminary after completing their undergraduate degree. Others take ministry positions straight from college, and rising juniors participate in a church internship program to prepare them for the pastoral ministry. In 1995 there were 1,290 BJU graduates serving as senior or associate pastors in churches across the United States. In 2017 more than 100 pastors in the Upstate alone were BJU graduates.\n\nThe university requires use of the King James Version (KJV) of the Bible in its services and classrooms, but it does not hold that the KJV is the only acceptable English translation or that it has the same authority as the original Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. The King-James-Only Movement—or more correctly, movements, since it has many variations—became a divisive force in fundamentalism only as conservative modern Bible translations, such as the New American Standard Bible (NASB) and the New International Version (NIV), began to appear in the 1970s. BJU has taken the position that orthodox Christians of the late 19th and early 20th centuries (including fundamentalists) agreed that while the KJV was a substantially accurate translation, only the original manuscripts of the Bible written in Hebrew and Greek were infallible and inerrant. Bob Jones, Jr. called the KJV-only position a \"heresy\" and \"in a very definite sense, a blasphemy\".\n\nThe Division of Fine Arts has the largest faculty of the university's six undergraduate schools. Each year the university presents an opera in the spring semester and Shakespearean plays in both the fall and spring semesters. A service called \"Vespers\", presented occasionally throughout the school year, combines music, speech, and drama. The Division of Fine Arts includes an RTV department with a campus radio and television station, WBJU. More than a hundred concerts, recitals, and laboratory theater productions are also presented annually.\n\nEach fall, as a recruiting tool, the university sponsors a \"High School Festival\" in which students compete in music, art, and speech (including preaching) contests with their peers from around the country. In the spring, a similar competition sponsored by the American Association of Christian Schools, and hosted by BJU since 1977, brings thousands of national finalists to the university from around the country. In 2005, 120 of the finalists from previous years returned to BJU as freshmen.\n\nBob Jones University supports young-earth creationism, all their biology faculty are young Earth creationists and the university rejects evolution, calling it \"at best an unsupportable and unworkable hypothesis\".\n\nThe school offers undergraduate majors in biology (zoo and wildlife, and cell biology), premed/predent, chemistry, engineering, and physics and also offers courses in astronomy. Between 80% and 100% of the pre-med graduates are accepted to medical school every year. The Department of Biology hosts two research programs on campus, one in cancer research, the other in animal behavior. In 2008 no member of the BJU science faculty held a degree in geology, and the university offered only one introductory course in the subject. Although ten of the sixteen members of the science faculty have undergraduate degrees from BJU, all earned their doctorates from accredited, non-religious institutions of higher learning. \nThe university's nursing major is approved by the South Carolina State Board of Nursing, and a BJU graduate with a BSN is eligible to take the National Council Licensure Examination to become a registered nurse. The BJU engineering program was accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET).\n\nBob Jones, Sr. was leery of academic accreditation almost from the founding of the college, and by the early 1930s, he had publicly stated his opposition to holding regional accreditation. Jones and the college were criticized for this stance, and academic recognition, as well as student and faculty recruitment, were hindered.\n\nIn 1944, Jones wrote to John Walvoord of Dallas Theological Seminary that while the university had \"no objection to educational work highly standardized…. We, however, cannot conscientiously let some group of educational experts or some committee of experts who may have a behavioristic or atheistic slant on education control or even influence the administrative policies of our college.\" Five years later, Jones reflected that \"it cost us something to stay out of an association, but we stayed out. We have lived up to our convictions.\" In any case, lack of accreditation seems to have made little difference during the post-war period, when the university more than doubled in size.\n\nBecause graduates did not have the benefit of accredited degrees, the faculty felt an increased responsibility to prepare their students. Early in the history of the college, there had been some hesitancy on the part of other institutions to accept BJU credits at face value, but by the 1960s, BJU alumni were being accepted by most of the major graduate and professional schools in the United States. Undoubtedly helpful was that some of the university's strongest programs were in the areas of music, speech, and art, disciplines in which ability could be measured by audition or portfolio rather than through paper qualifications.\n\nNevertheless, by the early 2000s, the university quietly reexamined its position on accreditation as degree mills proliferated and various government bureaucracies, such as law enforcement agencies, began excluding BJU graduates on the grounds that the university did not appear on appropriate federal lists. In 2004, the university began the process of joining the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools. Candidate status—effectively, accreditation—was obtained in April 2005, and full membership in the Association was conferred in November 2006. In December 2011, BJU announced its intention to apply for regional accreditation with the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACSCOC), and it received that accreditation in 2017.\n\nIn \"Forbes\" national university ranking, Bob Jones was unranked in 2011, #606 in 2010, and #279 in 2009. In 2014, the Educate to Career College Ranking Index listed BJU as 15th in the nation by economic value.\n\nBoth Bob Jones, Sr. and Bob Jones, Jr. believed that film could be an excellent medium for mass evangelism, and in 1950, the university established \"Unusual Films\" within the School of Fine Arts. (The studio name derives from a former BJU promotional slogan, \"The World's Most Unusual University\".) Bob Jones, Jr. selected a speech teacher, Katherine Stenholm, as the first director. Although she had no experience in cinema, she took summer courses at the University of Southern California and received personal instruction from Hollywood specialists, such as Rudolph Sternad.\n\nUnusual Films has produced seven feature-length films, each with an evangelistic emphasis: \"Wine of Morning\", \"Red Runs the River\", \"Flame in the Wind\", \"Sheffey\", \"Beyond the Night\", \"The Printing\", and \"Milltown Pride\". \"Wine of Morning\" (1955), based on a novel by Bob Jones, Jr., represented the United States at the Cannes Film Festival. The first four films are historical dramas set, respectively, in the time of Christ, the U.S. Civil War, 16th-century Spain, and the late 19th-century South—the latter a fictionalized treatment of the life of Methodist evangelist, Robert Sayers Sheffey. \"Beyond the Night\" closely follows an actual 20th-century missionary saga in Central Africa, and \"The Printing\" uses composite characters to portray the persecution of believers in the former Soviet Union. According to The Dove Foundation, \"The Printing\" \"no doubt will urge Christian believers everywhere to appreciate the freedoms they enjoy. It is inspiring!\" In 1999, Unusual Films began producing feature films for children, including \"The Treasure Map\", \"Project Dinosaur\", and \"Appalachian Trial\". They also released a short animated film for children, \"The Golden Rom\". Unusual Films returned to their customary format in 2011 with their release of \"Milltown Pride\", a historical film set in 1920s upstate South Carolina.\n\nUnusual Films also maintains a student film production program. The Cinema Production program is designed to give professional training in all facets of motion picture production. This training combines classroom instruction with hands-on experience in a variety of areas including directing, editing, and cinematography. Before graduation, seniors produce their own high-definition short film which they write, direct, and edit.\n\nBJU Press originated from the need for textbooks for the burgeoning Christian school movement, and today it is the largest book publisher in South Carolina. The press publishes a full range of K–12 textbooks. More than a million pre-college students around the world use BJU textbooks, and the press has about 2,500 titles in print.\n\nBJU Press also offers distance learning courses online, via DVD, and via hard drive. Another ancillary, the Academy of Home Education, is a \"service organization for homeschooling families\" that maintains student records, administers achievement testing, and issues high school diplomas. The press sold its music division, SoundForth, to Lorenz Publishing on October 1, 2012.\n\nThe university operates Bob Jones Academy, which enrolls students from preschool through 12th grade. With about 1500 students, it is the largest K–12 private school in the Carolinas and one of the largest in the Southeast.\n\nReligion is a major aspect of life and curriculum at BJU. The BJU Creed, written in 1927 by journalist and prohibitionist Sam Small, is recited by students and faculty four days a week at chapel services.\n\nThe university also encourages church planting in areas of the United States \"in great need of fundamental churches\", and it has provided financial and logistical assistance to ministerial graduates in starting more than a hundred new churches. Bob Jones III has also encouraged non-ministerial students to put their career plans on hold for two or three years to provide lay leadership for small churches. Students of various majors participate in Missions Advance (formerly Mission Prayer Band), an organization that prays for missionaries and attempts to stimulate campus interest in world evangelism. During summers and Christmas breaks, about 150 students participate in teams that use their musical, language, trade, and aviation skills to promote Christian missions around the world. Although a separate nonprofit corporation, Gospel Fellowship Association, an organization founded by Bob Jones Sr. and associated with BJU, is one of the largest fundamentalist mission boards in the country. Through its \"Timothy Fund\", the university also sponsors international students who are training for the ministry.\n\nThe university requires use of the King James Version (KJV) of the Bible in its services and classrooms, but it does not hold that the KJV is the only acceptable English translation or that it has the same authority as the original Hebrew and Greek manuscripts. The university's position has been criticized by some other fundamentalists, including fellow conservative university Pensacola Christian College, which in 1998 produced a widely distributed videotape which argued that this \"leaven of fundamentalism\" was passed from the 19th-century Princeton theologian Benjamin B. Warfield (1851–1921) through Charles Brokenshire (1885–1954) to current BJU faculty members and graduates.\n\nStrict rules govern student life at BJU. Some of these are based directly on the university's interpretation of the Bible. For instance, the 2015–16 Student Handbook states, \"Students are to avoid any types of entertainment that could be considered immodest or that contain profanity, scatological realism, sexual perversion, erotic realism, lurid violence, occultism and false philosophical or religious assumptions.\" Grounds for immediate dismissal include stealing, immorality (including sexual relations between unmarried students), possession of hard-core pornography, use of alcohol or drugs, and participating in a public demonstration for a cause the university opposes. Similar \"moral failures\" are grounds for terminating the employment of faculty and staff. In 1998, a homosexual alumnus was threatened with arrest if he visited the campus.\n\nFor years, male students were required to wear slacks, dress shirts and ties on campus during the day. This requirement has since been loosened; men are allowed the option of wearing polo shirts or dress shirts on weekdays until 5 pm, and are no longer required to wear ties. Women are required to wear skirts and dresses on campus on weekdays until 5 pm. They are also required to attend chapel four days a week, as well as at least two services per week at an approved \"local fundamental church.\"\n\nOther rules are not based on a specific biblical passage. For instance, the Handbook notes that \"there is no specific Bible command that says, 'Thou shalt not be late to class', but a student who wishes to display orderliness and concern for others will not come in late to the distraction of the teacher and other students.\" In 2008 a campus spokesman also said that one goal of the dress code was \"to teach our young people to dress professionally\" on campus while giving them \"the ability to...choose within the biblically accepted options of dress\" when they were off campus.\n\nAdditional rules include the requirement that freshman resident hall students sign out before leaving campus and that resident hall students abide by a campus curfew of 11:00 pm, with lights out at midnight. Students are forbidden to go to movie theaters while in residence, or listen to most contemporary popular music. Male students with upperclassman privileges and graduate students may have facial hair that is fully grown in prior to the start of the semester, neatly \ntrimmed and well maintained at approximately ½ inch or less. Women are expected to dress modestly and wear dresses or skirts that come to the knee to class and religious services. The university prohibits students from wearing clothing that displays the logos of Abercrombie & Fitch or its subsidiary Hollister because these companies have \"shown an unusual degree of antagonism to biblical morality\".\n\n After BJU abandoned intercollegiate sports in 1933, its intramural sports program included competition in soccer, basketball, softball, volleyball, tennis, badminton, flag football, table tennis, racquetball, and water polo. The university also competed in intercollegiate debate within the National Educational Debate Association, in intercollegiate mock trial and computer science competitions, and participated at South Carolina Student Legislature. In 2012, BJU joined Division I of National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and in 2014 participated in intercollegiate soccer, basketball, cross-country, and golf. The teams are known as the Bruins.\n\nThe university requires all unmarried incoming freshman students under the age of 23 to join one of 45 \"societies\". Societies meet most Fridays for entertainment and fellowship and also hold a weekly prayer meeting. Societies compete with one another in intramural sports, debate, and Scholastic Bowl. The university also has a student-staffed newspaper (\"The Collegian\"), and yearbook (\"Vintage\").\n\nEarly in December, thousands of students, faculty, and visitors gather around the front campus fountain for an annual Christmas carol sing and lighting ceremony, culminating in the illumination of tens of thousands of Christmas lights. On December 3, 2004, the ceremony broke the Guinness World Record for Christmas caroling with 7,514 carolers.\n\nBefore 2015, students and faculty were required to attend a six-day Bible Conference in lieu of a traditional Spring Break. However, the university announced that beginning in 2016, Bible Conference will be held in February, and students will be given a week of Spring Break in March. The Conference typically attracts fundamentalist preachers and laymen from around the country, and some BJU class reunions are held during the week.\n\nBJU's athletic teams compete in Division II of the National Christian College Athletic Association (NCCAA) and are collectively known as the Bruins. The school began its inaugural intercollegiate season with four teams: men's soccer, men's basketball, women's soccer, and women's basketball. Intercollegiate golf and cross country teams were added in the 2013–2014 school year.\n\nA number of BJU graduates have become influential within fundamentalist and evangelical Christianity, including Ken Hay (founder of \"The Wilds\" Christian camps) Ron \"Patch\" Hamilton (composer and president of Majesty Music) Billy Kim (former president of Baptist World Alliance), and Moisés Silva (president of the Evangelical Theological Society). BJU alumni also include the third pastor (1968–1976) of Riverside Church (Ernest T. Campbell), the former president of Northland Baptist Bible College (Les Ollila), late president of Baptist Bible College (Ernest Pickering), and the former president of Clearwater Christian College (Richard Stratton).\n\nOne BJU alumnus, Asa Hutchinson, serves as the governor of Arkansas and also served in the U.S. Congress; his brother Tim Hutchinson served in the US Senate. Others have served in state government: Michigan state senator Alan Cropsey, Pennsylvania state representative Gordon Denlinger, Pennsylvania state representative Mark M. Gillen, former Speaker Pro Tempore of the South Carolina House of Representatives Terry Haskins, member of the South Carolina House of Representatives Wendy Nanney, Pennsylvania state representative Sam Rohrer, member of the Missouri House of Representatives Ryan Silvey, Maryland state senator Bryan Simonaire, South Carolina state senator Danny Verdin.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4721", "title": "British Empire", "text": "British Empire\n\nThe British Empire comprised the dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandates and other territories ruled or administered by the United Kingdom and its predecessor states. It originated with the overseas possessions and trading posts established by England between the late 16th and early 18th centuries. At its height, it was the largest empire in history and, for over a century, was the foremost global power. By 1913, the British Empire held sway over 412 million people, of the world population at the time, and by 1920, it covered , of the Earth's total land area. As a result, its political, legal, linguistic and cultural legacy is widespread. At the peak of its power, the phrase \"the empire on which the sun never sets\" was often used to describe the British Empire, because its expanse around the globe meant that the sun was always shining on at least one of its territories.\n\nDuring the Age of Discovery in the 15th and 16th centuries, Portugal and Spain pioneered European exploration of the globe, and in the process established large overseas empires. Envious of the great wealth these empires generated, England, France, and the Netherlands began to establish colonies and trade networks of their own in the Americas and Asia. A series of wars in the 17th and 18th centuries with the Netherlands and France left England and then, following union between England and Scotland in 1707, Great Britain, the dominant colonial power in North America. It then became the dominant power in the Indian subcontinent after the East India Company's conquest of Mughal Bengal at the Battle of Plassey in 1757.\n\nThe independence of the Thirteen Colonies in North America in 1783 after the American War of Independence caused Britain to lose some of its oldest and most populous colonies. British attention soon turned towards Asia, Africa, and the Pacific. After the defeat of France in the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815), Britain emerged as the principal naval and imperial power of the 19th century. Unchallenged at sea, British dominance was later described as \"Pax Britannica\" (\"British Peace\"), a period of relative peace in Europe and the world (1815–1914) during which the British Empire became the global hegemon and adopted the role of global policeman. In the early 19th century, the Industrial Revolution began to transform Britain; by the time of the Great Exhibition in 1851 the country was described as the \"workshop of the world\". The British Empire expanded to include most of India, large parts of Africa and many other territories throughout the world. Alongside the formal control that Britain exerted over its own colonies, its dominance of much of world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of many regions, such as Asia and Latin America.\n\nIn Britain, political attitudes favoured free trade and laissez-faire policies and a gradual widening of the voting franchise. During the 19th Century, Britain's population increased at a dramatic rate, accompanied by rapid urbanisation, which caused significant social and economic stresses. To seek new markets and sources of raw materials, the Conservative Party under Benjamin Disraeli launched a period of imperialist expansion in Egypt, South Africa, and elsewhere. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand became self-governing dominions.\n\nBy the start of the 20th century, Germany and the United States had begun to challenge Britain's economic lead. Subsequent military and economic tensions between Britain and Germany were major causes of the First World War, during which Britain relied heavily upon its empire. The conflict placed enormous strain on the military, financial and manpower resources of Britain. Although the British Empire achieved its largest territorial extent immediately after World War I, Britain was no longer the world's pre-eminent industrial or military power. In the Second World War, Britain's colonies in Southeast Asia were occupied by Imperial Japan. Despite the final victory of Britain and its allies, the damage to British prestige helped to accelerate the decline of the empire. India, Britain's most valuable and populous possession, achieved independence as part of a larger decolonisation movement in which Britain granted independence to most territories of the empire. The transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997 marked for many the end of the British Empire. Fourteen overseas territories remain under British sovereignty.\n\nAfter independence, many former British colonies joined the Commonwealth of Nations, a free association of independent states. The United Kingdom is now one of 16 Commonwealth nations, a grouping known informally as the Commonwealth realms, that share a monarch, Queen Elizabeth II.\n\nThe foundations of the British Empire were laid when England and Scotland were separate kingdoms. In 1496, King Henry VII of England, following the successes of Spain and Portugal in overseas exploration, commissioned John Cabot to lead a voyage to discover a route to Asia via the North Atlantic. Cabot sailed in 1497, five years after the European discovery of America, but he made landfall on the coast of Newfoundland, and, mistakenly believing (like Christopher Columbus) that he had reached Asia, there was no attempt to found a colony. Cabot led another voyage to the Americas the following year but nothing was ever heard of his ships again.\n\nNo further attempts to establish English colonies in the Americas were made until well into the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, during the last decades of the 16th century. In the meantime the Protestant Reformation had turned England and Catholic Spain into implacable enemies. In 1562, the English Crown encouraged the privateers John Hawkins and Francis Drake to engage in slave-raiding attacks against Spanish and Portuguese ships off the coast of West Africa with the aim of breaking into the Atlantic slave trade. This effort was rebuffed and later, as the Anglo-Spanish Wars intensified, Elizabeth I gave her blessing to further privateering raids against Spanish ports in the Americas and shipping that was returning across the Atlantic, laden with treasure from the New World. At the same time, influential writers such as Richard Hakluyt and John Dee (who was the first to use the term \"British Empire\") were beginning to press for the establishment of England's own empire. By this time, Spain had become the dominant power in the Americas and was exploring the Pacific Ocean, Portugal had established trading posts and forts from the coasts of Africa and Brazil to China, and France had begun to settle the Saint Lawrence River area, later to become New France.\n\nAlthough England trailed behind other European powers in establishing overseas colonies, it had been engaged during the 16th century in the settlement of Ireland with Protestants from England and Scotland, drawing on precedents dating back to the Norman invasion of Ireland in 1169. Several people who helped establish the Plantations of Ireland also played a part in the early colonisation of North America, particularly a group known as the West Country men.\n\nIn 1578, Elizabeth I granted a patent to Humphrey Gilbert for discovery and overseas exploration. That year, Gilbert sailed for the Caribbean with the intention of engaging in piracy and establishing a colony in North America, but the expedition was aborted before it had crossed the Atlantic. In 1583 he embarked on a second attempt, on this occasion to the island of Newfoundland whose harbour he formally claimed for England, although no settlers were left behind. Gilbert did not survive the return journey to England, and was succeeded by his half-brother, Walter Raleigh, who was granted his own patent by Elizabeth in 1584. Later that year, Raleigh founded the Roanoke Colony on the coast of present-day North Carolina, but lack of supplies caused the colony to fail.\n\nIn 1603, James VI, King of Scots, ascended (as James I) to the English throne and in 1604 negotiated the Treaty of London, ending hostilities with Spain. Now at peace with its main rival, English attention shifted from preying on other nations' colonial infrastructures to the business of establishing its own overseas colonies. The British Empire began to take shape during the early 17th century, with the English settlement of North America and the smaller islands of the Caribbean, and the establishment of joint-stock companies, most notably the East India Company, to administer colonies and overseas trade. This period, until the loss of the Thirteen Colonies after the American War of Independence towards the end of the 18th century, has subsequently been referred to by some historians as the \"First British Empire\".\n\nThe Caribbean initially provided England's most important and lucrative colonies, but not before several attempts at colonisation failed. An attempt to establish a colony in Guiana in 1604 lasted only two years, and failed in its main objective to find gold deposits. Colonies in St Lucia (1605) and Grenada (1609) also rapidly folded, but settlements were successfully established in St. Kitts (1624), Barbados (1627) and Nevis (1628). The colonies soon adopted the system of sugar plantations successfully used by the Portuguese in Brazil, which depended on slave labour, and—at first—Dutch ships, to sell the slaves and buy the sugar. To ensure that the increasingly healthy profits of this trade remained in English hands, Parliament decreed in 1651 that only English ships would be able to ply their trade in English colonies. This led to hostilities with the United Dutch Provinces—a series of Anglo-Dutch Wars—which would eventually strengthen England's position in the Americas at the expense of the Dutch. In 1655, England annexed the island of Jamaica from the Spanish, and in 1666 succeeded in colonising the Bahamas.\nEngland's first permanent settlement in the Americas was founded in 1607 in Jamestown, led by Captain John Smith and managed by the Virginia Company. Bermuda was settled and claimed by England as a result of the 1609 shipwreck of the Virginia Company's flagship, and in 1615 was turned over to the newly formed Somers Isles Company. The Virginia Company's charter was revoked in 1624 and direct control of Virginia was assumed by the crown, thereby founding the Colony of Virginia. The London and Bristol Company was created in 1610 with the aim of creating a permanent settlement on Newfoundland, but was largely unsuccessful. In 1620, Plymouth was founded as a haven for Puritan religious separatists, later known as the Pilgrims. Fleeing from religious persecution would become the motive of many English would-be colonists to risk the arduous trans-Atlantic voyage: Maryland was founded as a haven for Roman Catholics (1634), Rhode Island (1636) as a colony tolerant of all religions and Connecticut (1639) for Congregationalists. The Province of Carolina was founded in 1663. With the surrender of Fort Amsterdam in 1664, England gained control of the Dutch colony of New Netherland, renaming it New York. This was formalised in negotiations following the Second Anglo-Dutch War, in exchange for Suriname. In 1681, the colony of Pennsylvania was founded by William Penn. The American colonies were less financially successful than those of the Caribbean, but had large areas of good agricultural land and attracted far larger numbers of English emigrants who preferred their temperate climates.\n\nIn 1670, Charles II incorporated by royal charter the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC), granting it a monopoly on the fur trade in the area known as Rupert's Land, which would later form a large proportion of the Dominion of Canada. Forts and trading posts established by the HBC were frequently the subject of attacks by the French, who had established their own fur trading colony in adjacent New France.\n\nTwo years later, the Royal African Company was inaugurated, receiving from King Charles a monopoly of the trade to supply slaves to the British colonies of the Caribbean. From the outset, slavery was the basis of the British Empire in the West Indies. Until the abolition of its slave trade in 1807, Britain was responsible for the transportation of 3.5 million African slaves to the Americas, a third of all slaves transported across the Atlantic. To facilitate this trade, forts were established on the coast of West Africa, such as James Island, Accra and Bunce Island. In the British Caribbean, the percentage of the population of African descent rose from 25% in 1650 to around 80% in 1780, and in the Thirteen Colonies from 10% to 40% over the same period (the majority in the southern colonies). For the slave traders, the trade was extremely profitable, and became a major economic mainstay for such western British cities as Bristol and Liverpool, which formed the third corner of the triangular trade with Africa and the Americas. For the transported, harsh and unhygienic conditions on the slaving ships and poor diets meant that the average mortality rate during the Middle Passage was one in seven.\n\nIn 1695, the Parliament of Scotland granted a charter to the Company of Scotland, which established a settlement in 1698 on the Isthmus of Panama. Besieged by neighbouring Spanish colonists of New Granada, and afflicted by malaria, the colony was abandoned two years later. The Darien scheme was a financial disaster for Scotland — a quarter of Scottish capital was lost in the enterprise — and ended Scottish hopes of establishing its own overseas empire. The episode also had major political consequences, persuading the governments of both England and Scotland of the merits of a union of countries, rather than just crowns. This occurred in 1707 with the Treaty of Union, establishing the Kingdom of Great Britain.\n\nAt the end of the 16th century, England and the Netherlands began to challenge Portugal's monopoly of trade with Asia, forming private joint-stock companies to finance the voyages—the English, later British, East India Company and the Dutch East India Company, chartered in 1600 and 1602 respectively. The primary aim of these companies was to tap into the lucrative spice trade, an effort focused mainly on two regions; the East Indies archipelago, and an important hub in the trade network, India. There, they competed for trade supremacy with Portugal and with each other. Although England ultimately eclipsed the Netherlands as a colonial power, in the short term the Netherlands' more advanced financial system and the three Anglo-Dutch Wars of the 17th century left it with a stronger position in Asia. Hostilities ceased after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 when the Dutch William of Orange ascended the English throne, bringing peace between the Netherlands and England. A deal between the two nations left the spice trade of the East Indies archipelago to the Netherlands and the textiles industry of India to England, but textiles soon overtook spices in terms of profitability, and by 1720, in terms of sales, the British company had overtaken the Dutch.\n\nPeace between England and the Netherlands in 1688 meant that the two countries entered the Nine Years' War as allies, but the conflict—waged in Europe and overseas between France, Spain and the Anglo-Dutch alliance—left the English a stronger colonial power than the Dutch, who were forced to devote a larger proportion of their military budget on the costly land war in Europe. The 18th century saw England (after 1707, Britain) rise to be the world's dominant colonial power, and France becoming its main rival on the imperial stage.\n\nThe death of Charles II of Spain in 1700 and his bequeathal of Spain and its colonial empire to Philippe of Anjou, a grandson of the King of France, raised the prospect of the unification of France, Spain and their respective colonies, an unacceptable state of affairs for England and the other powers of Europe. In 1701, England, Portugal and the Netherlands sided with the Holy Roman Empire against Spain and France in the War of the Spanish Succession, which lasted until 1714.\n\nAt the concluding Treaty of Utrecht, Philip renounced his and his descendants' right to the French throne and Spain lost its empire in Europe. The British Empire was territorially enlarged: from France, Britain gained Newfoundland and Acadia, and from Spain, Gibraltar and Minorca. Gibraltar became a critical naval base and allowed Britain to control the Atlantic entry and exit point to the Mediterranean. Spain also ceded the rights to the lucrative \"asiento\" (permission to sell slaves in Spanish America) to Britain.\nDuring the middle decades of the 18th century, there were several outbreaks of military conflict on the Indian subcontinent, the Carnatic Wars, as the English East India Company (often known simply as \"the Company\") and its French counterpart, the French East India Company (\"Compagnie française des Indes orientales\"), struggled alongside local rulers to fill the vacuum that had been left by the decline of the Mughal Empire. The Battle of Plassey in 1757, in which the British, led by Robert Clive, defeated the Nawab of Bengal and his French allies, left the British East India Company in control of Bengal and as the major military and political power in India. France was left control of its enclaves but with military restrictions and an obligation to support British client states, ending French hopes of controlling India. In the following decades the British East India Company gradually increased the size of the territories under its control, either ruling directly or via local rulers under the threat of force from the British Indian Army, the vast majority of which was composed of Indian sepoys.\n\nThe British and French struggles in India became but one theatre of the global Seven Years' War (1756–1763) involving France, Britain and the other major European powers. The signing of the Treaty of Paris (1763) had important consequences for the future of the British Empire. In North America, France's future as a colonial power effectively ended with the recognition of British claims to Rupert's Land, and the ceding of New France to Britain (leaving a sizeable French-speaking population under British control) and Louisiana to Spain. Spain ceded Florida to Britain. Along with its victory over France in India, the Seven Years' War therefore left Britain as the world's most powerful maritime power.\n\nDuring the 1760s and early 1770s, relations between the Thirteen Colonies and Britain became increasingly strained, primarily because of resentment of the British Parliament's attempts to govern and tax American colonists without their consent. This was summarised at the time by the slogan \"No taxation without representation\", a perceived violation of the guaranteed Rights of Englishmen. The American Revolution began with rejection of Parliamentary authority and moves towards self-government. In response Britain sent troops to reimpose direct rule, leading to the outbreak of war in 1775. The following year, in 1776, the United States declared independence. The entry of France into the war in 1778 tipped the military balance in the Americans' favour and after a decisive defeat at Yorktown in 1781, Britain began negotiating peace terms. American independence was acknowledged at the Peace of Paris in 1783.\nThe loss of such a large portion of British America, at the time Britain's most populous overseas possession, is seen by some historians as the event defining the transition between the \"first\" and \"second\" empires, in which Britain shifted its attention away from the Americas to Asia, the Pacific and later Africa. Adam Smith's \"Wealth of Nations\", published in 1776, had argued that colonies were redundant, and that free trade should replace the old mercantilist policies that had characterised the first period of colonial expansion, dating back to the protectionism of Spain and Portugal. The growth of trade between the newly independent United States and Britain after 1783 seemed to confirm Smith's view that political control was not necessary for economic success.\n\nThe war to the south influenced British policy in Canada, where between 40,000 and 100,000 defeated Loyalists had migrated from the new United States following independence. The 14,000 Loyalists who went to the Saint John and Saint Croix river valleys, then part of Nova Scotia, felt too far removed from the provincial government in Halifax, so London split off New Brunswick as a separate colony in 1784. The Constitutional Act of 1791 created the provinces of Upper Canada (mainly English-speaking) and Lower Canada (mainly French-speaking) to defuse tensions between the French and British communities, and implemented governmental systems similar to those employed in Britain, with the intention of asserting imperial authority and not allowing the sort of popular control of government that was perceived to have led to the American Revolution.\n\nTensions between Britain and the United States escalated again during the Napoleonic Wars, as Britain tried to cut off American trade with France and boarded American ships to impress men into the Royal Navy. The US declared war, the War of 1812, and invaded Canadian territory. In response Britain invaded the US, but the pre-war boundaries were reaffirmed by the 1814 Treaty of Ghent, ensuring Canada's future would be separate from that of the United States.\n\nSince 1718, transportation to the American colonies had been a penalty for various offences in Britain, with approximately one thousand convicts transported per year across the Atlantic. Forced to find an alternative location after the loss of the Thirteen Colonies in 1783, the British government turned to the newly discovered lands of Australia. The western coast of Australia had been discovered for Europeans by the Dutch explorer Willem Janszoon in 1606 and was later named New Holland by the Dutch East India Company, but there was no attempt to colonise it. In 1770 James Cook discovered the eastern coast of Australia while on a scientific voyage to the South Pacific Ocean, claimed the continent for Britain, and named it New South Wales. In 1778, Joseph Banks, Cook's botanist on the voyage, presented evidence to the government on the suitability of Botany Bay for the establishment of a penal settlement, and in 1787 the first shipment of convicts set sail, arriving in 1788. Britain continued to transport convicts to New South Wales until 1840. The Australian colonies became profitable exporters of wool and gold, mainly because of gold rushes in the colony of Victoria, making its capital Melbourne for a time the richest city in the world and the second largest city (after London) in the British Empire.\n\nDuring his voyage, Cook also visited New Zealand, first discovered by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman in 1642, and claimed the North and South islands for the British crown in 1769 and 1770 respectively. Initially, interaction between the indigenous Māori population and Europeans was limited to the trading of goods. European settlement increased through the early decades of the 19th century, with numerous trading stations established, especially in the North. In 1839, the New Zealand Company announced plans to buy large tracts of land and establish colonies in New Zealand. On 6 February 1840, Captain William Hobson and around 40 Maori chiefs signed the Treaty of Waitangi. This treaty is considered by many to be New Zealand's founding document, but differing interpretations of the Maori and English versions of the text have meant that it continues to be a source of dispute.\n\nBritain was challenged again by France under Napoleon, in a struggle that, unlike previous wars, represented a contest of ideologies between the two nations. It was not only Britain's position on the world stage that was at risk: Napoleon threatened to invade Britain itself, just as his armies had overrun many countries of continental Europe.\n\nThe Napoleonic Wars were therefore ones in which Britain invested large amounts of capital and resources to win. French ports were blockaded by the Royal Navy, which won a decisive victory over a Franco-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in 1805. Overseas colonies were attacked and occupied, including those of the Netherlands, which was annexed by Napoleon in 1810. France was finally defeated by a coalition of European armies in 1815. Britain was again the beneficiary of peace treaties: France ceded the Ionian Islands, Malta (which it had occupied in 1797 and 1798 respectively), Mauritius, Saint Lucia, and Tobago; Spain ceded Trinidad; the Netherlands Guyana, and the Cape Colony. Britain returned Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana, and Réunion to France, and Java and Suriname to the Netherlands, while gaining control of Ceylon (1795–1815).\n\nWith the advent of the Industrial Revolution, goods produced by slavery became less important to the British economy. Added to this was the cost of suppressing regular slave rebellions. With support from the British abolitionist movement, Parliament enacted the Slave Trade Act in 1807, which abolished the slave trade in the empire. In 1808, Sierra Leone was designated an official British colony for freed slaves. Parliamentary reform in 1832 saw the influence of the West India Committee decline. The Slavery Abolition Act, passed the following year, abolished slavery in the British Empire on 1 August 1834, finally bringing the Empire into line with the law in the UK (with the exception of St. Helena, Ceylon and the territories administered by the East India Company, though these exclusions were later repealed). Under the Act, slaves were granted full emancipation after a period of four to six years of \"apprenticeship\". The British government compensated slave-owners.\n\nBetween 1815 and 1914, a period referred to as Britain's \"imperial century\" by some historians, around of territory and roughly 400 million people were added to the British Empire. Victory over Napoleon left Britain without any serious international rival, other than Russia in Central Asia. Unchallenged at sea, Britain adopted the role of global policeman, a state of affairs later known as the \"Pax Britannica\", and a foreign policy of \"splendid isolation\". Alongside the formal control it exerted over its own colonies, Britain's dominant position in world trade meant that it effectively controlled the economies of many countries, such as China, Argentina and Siam, which has been described by some historians as an \"Informal Empire\".\n\nBritish imperial strength was underpinned by the steamship and the telegraph, new technologies invented in the second half of the 19th century, allowing it to control and defend the empire. By 1902, the British Empire was linked together by a network of telegraph cables, called the All Red Line.\n\nThe East India Company drove the expansion of the British Empire in Asia. The Company's army had first joined forces with the Royal Navy during the Seven Years' War, and the two continued to co-operate in arenas outside India: the eviction of the French from Egypt (1799), the capture of Java from the Netherlands (1811), the acquisition of Penang Island (1786), Singapore (1819) and Malacca (1824), and the defeat of Burma (1826).\n\nFrom its base in India, the Company had also been engaged in an increasingly profitable opium export trade to China since the 1730s. This trade, illegal since it was outlawed by the Qing dynasty in 1729, helped reverse the trade imbalances resulting from the British imports of tea, which saw large outflows of silver from Britain to China. In 1839, the confiscation by the Chinese authorities at Canton of 20,000 chests of opium led Britain to attack China in the First Opium War, and resulted in the seizure by Britain of Hong Kong Island, at that time a minor settlement.\n\nDuring the late 18th and early 19th centuries the British Crown began to assume an increasingly large role in the affairs of the Company. A series of Acts of Parliament were passed, including the Regulating Act of 1773, Pitt's India Act of 1784 and the Charter Act of 1813 which regulated the Company's affairs and established the sovereignty of the Crown over the territories that it had acquired. The Company's eventual end was precipitated by the Indian Rebellion, a conflict that had begun with the mutiny of sepoys, Indian troops under British officers and discipline. The rebellion took six months to suppress, with heavy loss of life on both sides. The following year the British government dissolved the Company and assumed direct control over India through the Government of India Act 1858, establishing the British Raj, where an appointed governor-general administered India and Queen Victoria was crowned the Empress of India. India became the empire's most valuable possession, \"the Jewel in the Crown\", and was the most important source of Britain's strength.\n\nA series of serious crop failures in the late 19th century led to widespread famines on the subcontinent in which it is estimated that over 15 million people died. The East India Company had failed to implement any coordinated policy to deal with the famines during its period of rule. Later, under direct British rule, commissions were set up after each famine to investigate the causes and implement new policies, which took until the early 1900s to have an effect.\n\nDuring the 19th century, Britain and the Russian Empire vied to fill the power vacuums that had been left by the declining Ottoman Empire, Qajar dynasty and Qing Dynasty. This rivalry in Central Asia came to be known as the \"Great Game\". As far as Britain was concerned, defeats inflicted by Russia on Persia and Turkey demonstrated its imperial ambitions and capabilities and stoked fears in Britain of an overland invasion of India. In 1839, Britain moved to pre-empt this by invading Afghanistan, but the First Anglo-Afghan War was a disaster for Britain.\n\nWhen Russia invaded the Turkish Balkans in 1853, fears of Russian dominance in the Mediterranean and Middle East led Britain and France to invade the Crimean Peninsula to destroy Russian naval capabilities. The ensuing Crimean War (1854–56), which involved new techniques of modern warfare, was the only global war fought between Britain and another imperial power during the \"Pax Britannica\" and was a resounding defeat for Russia. The situation remained unresolved in Central Asia for two more decades, with Britain annexing Baluchistan in 1876 and Russia annexing Kirghizia, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan. For a while it appeared that another war would be inevitable, but the two countries reached an agreement on their respective spheres of influence in the region in 1878 and on all outstanding matters in 1907 with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente. The destruction of the Russian Navy by the Japanese at the Battle of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–05 also limited its threat to the British.\n\nThe Dutch East India Company had founded the Cape Colony on the southern tip of Africa in 1652 as a way station for its ships travelling to and from its colonies in the East Indies. Britain formally acquired the colony, and its large Afrikaner (or Boer) population in 1806, having occupied it in 1795 to prevent its falling into French hands during the Flanders Campaign. British immigration began to rise after 1820, and pushed thousands of Boers, resentful of British rule, northwards to found their own—mostly short-lived—independent republics, during the Great Trek of the late 1830s and early 1840s. In the process the Voortrekkers clashed repeatedly with the British, who had their own agenda with regard to colonial expansion in South Africa and to the various native African polities, including those of the Sotho and the Zulu nations. Eventually the Boers established two republics which had a longer lifespan: the South African Republic or Transvaal Republic (1852–77; 1881–1902) and the Orange Free State (1854–1902). In 1902 Britain occupied both republics, concluding a treaty with the two Boer Republics following the Second Boer War (1899–1902).\n\nIn 1869 the Suez Canal opened under Napoleon III, linking the Mediterranean with the Indian Ocean. Initially the Canal was opposed by the British; but once opened, its strategic value was quickly recognised and became the \"jugular vein of the Empire\". In 1875, the Conservative government of Benjamin Disraeli bought the indebted Egyptian ruler Isma'il Pasha's 44% shareholding in the Suez Canal for £4 million (equivalent to £ in ). Although this did not grant outright control of the strategic waterway, it did give Britain leverage. Joint Anglo-French financial control over Egypt ended in outright British occupation in 1882. The French were still majority shareholders and attempted to weaken the British position, but a compromise was reached with the 1888 Convention of Constantinople, which made the Canal officially neutral territory.\n\nWith competitive French, Belgian and Portuguese activity in the lower Congo River region undermining orderly colonisation of tropical Africa, the Berlin Conference of 1884–85 was held to regulate the competition between the European powers in what was called the \"Scramble for Africa\" by defining \"effective occupation\" as the criterion for international recognition of territorial claims. The scramble continued into the 1890s, and caused Britain to reconsider its decision in 1885 to withdraw from Sudan. A joint force of British and Egyptian troops defeated the Mahdist Army in 1896, and rebuffed an attempted French invasion at Fashoda in 1898. Sudan was nominally made an Anglo-Egyptian condominium, but a British colony in reality.\n\nBritish gains in Southern and East Africa prompted Cecil Rhodes, pioneer of British expansion in Southern Africa, to urge a \"Cape to Cairo\" railway linking the strategically important Suez Canal to the mineral-rich south of the continent. During the 1880s and 1890s, Rhodes, with his privately owned British South Africa Company, occupied and annexed territories subsequently named after him, Rhodesia.\n\nThe path to independence for the white colonies of the British Empire began with the 1839 Durham Report, which proposed unification and self-government for Upper and Lower Canada, as a solution to political unrest which had erupted in armed rebellions in 1837. This began with the passing of the Act of Union in 1840, which created the Province of Canada. Responsible government was first granted to Nova Scotia in 1848, and was soon extended to the other British North American colonies. With the passage of the British North America Act, 1867 by the British Parliament, Upper and Lower Canada, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia were formed into the Dominion of Canada, a confederation enjoying full self-government with the exception of international relations. Australia and New Zealand achieved similar levels of self-government after 1900, with the Australian colonies federating in 1901. The term \"dominion status\" was officially introduced at the Colonial Conference of 1907.\n\nThe last decades of the 19th century saw concerted political campaigns for Irish home rule. Ireland had been united with Britain into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland with the Act of Union 1800 after the Irish Rebellion of 1798, and had suffered a severe famine between 1845 and 1852. Home rule was supported by the British Prime minister, William Gladstone, who hoped that Ireland might follow in Canada's footsteps as a Dominion within the empire, but his 1886 Home Rule bill was defeated in Parliament. Although the bill, if passed, would have granted Ireland less autonomy within the UK than the Canadian provinces had within their own federation, many MPs feared that a partially independent Ireland might pose a security threat to Great Britain or mark the beginning of the break-up of the empire. A second Home Rule bill was also defeated for similar reasons. A third bill was passed by Parliament in 1914, but not implemented because of the outbreak of the First World War leading to the 1916 Easter Rising.\n\nBy the turn of the 20th century, fears had begun to grow in Britain that it would no longer be able to defend the metropole and the entirety of the empire while at the same time maintaining the policy of \"splendid isolation\". Germany was rapidly rising as a military and industrial power and was now seen as the most likely opponent in any future war. Recognising that it was overstretched in the Pacific and threatened at home by the Imperial German Navy, Britain formed an alliance with Japan in 1902 and with its old enemies France and Russia in 1904 and 1907, respectively.\n\nBritain's fears of war with Germany were realised in 1914 with the outbreak of the First World War. Britain quickly invaded and occupied most of Germany's overseas colonies in Africa. In the Pacific, Australia and New Zealand occupied German New Guinea and Samoa respectively. Plans for a post-war division of the Ottoman Empire, which had joined the war on Germany's side, were secretly drawn up by Britain and France under the 1916 Sykes–Picot Agreement. This agreement was not divulged to the Sharif of Mecca, who the British had been encouraging to launch an Arab revolt against their Ottoman rulers, giving the impression that Britain was supporting the creation of an independent Arab state.\nThe British declaration of war on Germany and its allies also committed the colonies and Dominions, which provided invaluable military, financial and material support. Over 2.5 million men served in the armies of the Dominions, as well as many thousands of volunteers from the Crown colonies. The contributions of Australian and New Zealand troops during the 1915 Gallipoli Campaign against the Ottoman Empire had a great impact on the national consciousness at home, and marked a watershed in the transition of Australia and New Zealand from colonies to nations in their own right. The countries continue to commemorate this occasion on Anzac Day. Canadians viewed the Battle of Vimy Ridge in a similar light. The important contribution of the Dominions to the war effort was recognised in 1917 by the British Prime Minister David Lloyd George when he invited each of the Dominion Prime Ministers to join an Imperial War Cabinet to co-ordinate imperial policy.\n\nUnder the terms of the concluding Treaty of Versailles signed in 1919, the empire reached its greatest extent with the addition of and 13 million new subjects. The colonies of Germany and the Ottoman Empire were distributed to the Allied powers as League of Nations mandates. Britain gained control of Palestine, Transjordan, Iraq, parts of Cameroon and Togoland, and Tanganyika. The Dominions themselves also acquired mandates of their own: the Union of South Africa gained South West Africa (modern-day Namibia), Australia gained New Guinea, and New Zealand Western Samoa. Nauru was made a combined mandate of Britain and the two Pacific Dominions.\n\nThe changing world order that the war had brought about, in particular the growth of the United States and Japan as naval powers, and the rise of independence movements in India and Ireland, caused a major reassessment of British imperial policy. Forced to choose between alignment with the United States or Japan, Britain opted not to renew its Japanese alliance and instead signed the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty, where Britain accepted naval parity with the United States. This decision was the source of much debate in Britain during the 1930s as militaristic governments took hold in Japan and Germany helped in part by the Great Depression, for it was feared that the empire could not survive a simultaneous attack by both nations. The issue of the empire's security was a serious concern in Britain, as it was vital to the British economy.\n\nIn 1919, the frustrations caused by delays to Irish home rule led the MPs of Sinn Féin, a pro-independence party that had won a majority of the Irish seats in the 1918 British general election, to establish an independent parliament in Dublin, at which Irish independence was declared. The Irish Republican Army simultaneously began a guerrilla war against the British administration. The Anglo-Irish War ended in 1921 with a stalemate and the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, creating the Irish Free State, a Dominion within the British Empire, with effective internal independence but still constitutionally linked with the British Crown. Northern Ireland, consisting of six of the 32 Irish counties which had been established as a devolved region under the 1920 Government of Ireland Act, immediately exercised its option under the treaty to retain its existing status within the United Kingdom.\nA similar struggle began in India when the Government of India Act 1919 failed to satisfy demand for independence. Concerns over communist and foreign plots following the Ghadar Conspiracy ensured that war-time strictures were renewed by the Rowlatt Acts. This led to tension, particularly in the Punjab region, where repressive measures culminated in the Amritsar Massacre. In Britain public opinion was divided over the morality of the massacre, between those who saw it as having saved India from anarchy, and those who viewed it with revulsion. The subsequent Non-Co-Operation movement was called off in March 1922 following the Chauri Chaura incident, and discontent continued to simmer for the next 25 years.\n\nIn 1922, Egypt, which had been declared a British protectorate at the outbreak of the First World War, was granted formal independence, though it continued to be a British client state until 1954. British troops remained stationed in Egypt until the signing of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty in 1936, under which it was agreed that the troops would withdraw but continue to occupy and defend the Suez Canal zone. In return, Egypt was assisted in joining the League of Nations. Iraq, a British mandate since 1920, also gained membership of the League in its own right after achieving independence from Britain in 1932. In Palestine, Britain was presented with the problem of mediating between the Arabs and increasing numbers of Jews. The 1917 Balfour Declaration, which had been incorporated into the terms of the mandate, stated that a national home for the Jewish people would be established in Palestine, and Jewish immigration allowed up to a limit that would be determined by the mandatory power. This led to increasing conflict with the Arab population, who openly revolted in 1936. As the threat of war with Germany increased during the 1930s, Britain judged the support of Arabs as more important than the establishment of a Jewish homeland, and shifted to a pro-Arab stance, limiting Jewish immigration and in turn triggering a Jewish insurgency.\n\nThe right of the Dominions to set their own foreign policy, independent of Britain, was recognised at the 1923 Imperial Conference. Britain's request for military assistance from the Dominions at the outbreak of the Chanak Crisis the previous year had been turned down by Canada and South Africa, and Canada had refused to be bound by the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. After pressure from the Irish Free State and South Africa, the 1926 Imperial Conference issued the Balfour Declaration of 1926, declaring the Dominions to be \"autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another\" within a \"British Commonwealth of Nations\". This declaration was given legal substance under the 1931 Statute of Westminster. The parliaments of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Union of South Africa, the Irish Free State and Newfoundland were now independent of British legislative control, they could nullify British laws and Britain could no longer pass laws for them without their consent. Newfoundland reverted to colonial status in 1933, suffering from financial difficulties during the Great Depression. The Irish Free State distanced itself further from the British state with the introduction of a new constitution in 1937, making it a republic in all but name.\n\nBritain's declaration of war against Nazi Germany in September 1939 included the Crown colonies and India but did not automatically commit the Dominions of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland and South Africa. All soon declared war on Germany, but Ireland chose to remain legally neutral throughout the war. \n\nAfter the Fall of France in June 1940, Britain and the empire stood alone against Germany, until the German invasion of Greece on 7 April 1941. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill successfully lobbied President Franklin D. Roosevelt for military aid from the United States, but Roosevelt was not yet ready to ask Congress to commit the country to war. In August 1941, Churchill and Roosevelt met and signed the Atlantic Charter, which included the statement that \"the rights of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they live\" should be respected. This wording was ambiguous as to whether it referred to European countries invaded by Germany and Italy, or the peoples colonised by European nations, and would later be interpreted differently by the British, Americans, and nationalist movements.\n\nIn December 1941, Japan launched, in quick succession, attacks on British Malaya, the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, and Hong Kong. Churchill's reaction to the entry of the United States into the war was that Britain was now assured of victory and the future of the empire was safe, but the manner in which British forces were rapidly defeated in the Far East irreversibly harmed Britain's standing and prestige as an imperial power. Most damaging of all was the Fall of Singapore, which had previously been hailed as an impregnable fortress and the eastern equivalent of Gibraltar. The realisation that Britain could not defend its entire empire pushed Australia and New Zealand, which now appeared threatened by Japanese forces, into closer ties with the United States. This resulted in the 1951 ANZUS Pact between Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America.\n\nThough Britain and the empire emerged victorious from the Second World War, the effects of the conflict were profound, both at home and abroad. Much of Europe, a continent that had dominated the world for several centuries, was in ruins, and host to the armies of the United States and the Soviet Union, who now held the balance of global power. Britain was left essentially bankrupt, with insolvency only averted in 1946 after the negotiation of a $US 4.33 billion loan from the United States, the last instalment of which was repaid in 2006. At the same time, anti-colonial movements were on the rise in the colonies of European nations. The situation was complicated further by the increasing Cold War rivalry of the United States and the Soviet Union. In principle, both nations were opposed to European colonialism. In practice, however, American anti-communism prevailed over anti-imperialism, and therefore the United States supported the continued existence of the British Empire to keep Communist expansion in check. The \"wind of change\" ultimately meant that the British Empire's days were numbered, and on the whole, Britain adopted a policy of peaceful disengagement from its colonies once stable, non-Communist governments were available to transfer power to. This was in contrast to other European powers such as France and Portugal, which waged costly and ultimately unsuccessful wars to keep their empires intact. Between 1945 and 1965, the number of people under British rule outside the UK itself fell from 700 million to five million, three million of whom were in Hong Kong.\n\nThe pro-decolonisation Labour government, elected at the 1945 general election and led by Clement Attlee, moved quickly to tackle the most pressing issue facing the empire: Indian independence. India's two major political parties—the Indian National Congress (led by Mahatma Gandhi) and the Muslim League (led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah)—had been campaigning for independence for decades, but disagreed as to how it should be implemented. Congress favoured a unified secular Indian state, whereas the League, fearing domination by the Hindu majority, desired a separate Islamic state for Muslim-majority regions. Increasing civil unrest and the mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy during 1946 led Attlee to promise independence no later than June 30, 1948. When the urgency of the situation and risk of civil war became apparent, the newly appointed (and last) Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, hastily brought forward the date to 15 August 1947. The borders drawn by the British to broadly partition India into Hindu and Muslim areas left tens of millions as minorities in the newly independent states of India and Pakistan. Millions of Muslims subsequently crossed from India to Pakistan and Hindus vice versa, and violence between the two communities cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Burma, which had been administered as part of the British Raj, and Sri Lanka gained their independence the following year in 1948. India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka became members of the Commonwealth, while Burma chose not to join.\n\nThe British mandate in Palestine, where an Arab majority lived alongside a Jewish minority, presented the British with a similar problem to that of India. The matter was complicated by large numbers of Jewish refugees seeking to be admitted to Palestine following the Holocaust, while Arabs were opposed to the creation of a Jewish state. Frustrated by the intractability of the problem, attacks by Jewish paramilitary organisations and the increasing cost of maintaining its military presence, Britain announced in 1947 that it would withdraw in 1948 and leave the matter to the United Nations to solve. The UN General Assembly subsequently voted for a plan to partition Palestine into a Jewish and an Arab state.\n\nFollowing the defeat of Japan in the Second World War, anti-Japanese resistance movements in Malaya turned their attention towards the British, who had moved to quickly retake control of the colony, valuing it as a source of rubber and tin. The fact that the guerrillas were primarily Malayan-Chinese Communists meant that the British attempt to quell the uprising was supported by the Muslim Malay majority, on the understanding that once the insurgency had been quelled, independence would be granted. The Malayan Emergency, as it was called, began in 1948 and lasted until 1960, but by 1957, Britain felt confident enough to grant independence to the Federation of Malaya within the Commonwealth. In 1963, the 11 states of the federation together with Singapore, Sarawak and North Borneo joined to form Malaysia, but in 1965 Chinese-majority Singapore was expelled from the union following tensions between the Malay and Chinese populations. Brunei, which had been a British protectorate since 1888, declined to join the union and maintained its status until independence in 1984.\n\nIn 1951, the Conservative Party returned to power in Britain, under the leadership of Winston Churchill. Churchill and the Conservatives believed that Britain's position as a world power relied on the continued existence of the empire, with the base at the Suez Canal allowing Britain to maintain its pre-eminent position in the Middle East in spite of the loss of India. However, Churchill could not ignore Gamal Abdul Nasser's new revolutionary government of Egypt that had taken power in 1952, and the following year it was agreed that British troops would withdraw from the Suez Canal zone and that Sudan would be granted self-determination by 1955, with independence to follow. Sudan was granted independence on 1 January 1956.\n\nIn July 1956, Nasser unilaterally nationalised the Suez Canal. The response of Anthony Eden, who had succeeded Churchill as Prime Minister, was to collude with France to engineer an Israeli attack on Egypt that would give Britain and France an excuse to intervene militarily and retake the canal. Eden infuriated US President Dwight D. Eisenhower, by his lack of consultation, and Eisenhower refused to back the invasion. Another of Eisenhower's concerns was the possibility of a wider war with the Soviet Union after it threatened to intervene on the Egyptian side. Eisenhower applied financial leverage by threatening to sell US reserves of the British pound and thereby precipitate a collapse of the British currency. Though the invasion force was militarily successful in its objectives, UN intervention and US pressure forced Britain into a humiliating withdrawal of its forces, and Eden resigned.\n\nThe Suez Crisis very publicly exposed Britain's limitations to the world and confirmed Britain's decline on the world stage, demonstrating that henceforth it could no longer act without at least the acquiescence, if not the full support, of the United States. The events at Suez wounded British national pride, leading one MP to describe it as \"Britain's Waterloo\" and another to suggest that the country had become an \"American satellite\". Margaret Thatcher later described the mindset she believed had befallen Britain's political leaders as \"Suez syndrome\" where they “went from believing that Britain could do anything to an almost neurotic belief that Britain could do nothing”, from which Britain did not recover until the successful recapture of the Falkland Islands from Argentina in 1982.\n\nWhile the Suez Crisis caused British power in the Middle East to weaken, it did not collapse. Britain again deployed its armed forces to the region, intervening in Oman (1957), Jordan (1958) and Kuwait (1961), though on these occasions with American approval, as the new Prime Minister Harold Macmillan's foreign policy was to remain firmly aligned with the United States. Britain maintained a military presence in the Middle East for another decade. On 16 January 1968, a few weeks after the devaluation of the pound, Prime Minister Harold Wilson and his Defence Secretary Denis Healey announced that British troops would be withdrawn from major military bases East of Suez, which included the ones in the Middle East, and primarily from Malaysia and Singapore by the end of 1971, instead of 1975 as earlier planned. By that time over 50,000 British military personnel were still stationed in the Far East, including 30,000 in Singapore. The British withdrew from Aden in 1967, Bahrain in 1971, and the Maldives in 1976.\n\nMacmillan gave a speech in Cape Town, South Africa in February 1960 where he spoke of \"the wind of change blowing through this continent\". Macmillan wished to avoid the same kind of colonial war that France was fighting in Algeria, and under his premiership decolonisation proceeded rapidly. To the three colonies that had been granted independence in the 1950s—Sudan, the Gold Coast and Malaya—were added nearly ten times that number during the 1960s.\n\nBritain's remaining colonies in Africa, except for self-governing Southern Rhodesia, were all granted independence by 1968. British withdrawal from the southern and eastern parts of Africa was not a peaceful process. Kenyan independence was preceded by the eight-year Mau Mau Uprising. In Rhodesia, the 1965 Unilateral Declaration of Independence by the white minority resulted in a civil war that lasted until the Lancaster House Agreement of 1979, which set the terms for recognised independence in 1980, as the new nation of Zimbabwe.\n\nIn the Mediterranean, a guerrilla war waged by Greek Cypriots ended in 1960 leading to an independent Cyprus, with the UK retaining the military bases of Akrotiri and Dhekelia. The Mediterranean islands of Malta and Gozo were amicably granted independence from the UK in 1964 and became the country of Malta, though the idea had been raised in 1955 of integration with Britain.\n\nMost of the UK's Caribbean territories achieved independence after the departure in 1961 and 1962 of Jamaica and Trinidad from the West Indies Federation, established in 1958 in an attempt to unite the British Caribbean colonies under one government, but which collapsed following the loss of its two largest members. Barbados achieved independence in 1966 and the remainder of the eastern Caribbean islands in the 1970s and 1980s, but Anguilla and the Turks and Caicos Islands opted to revert to British rule after they had already started on the path to independence. The British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands and Montserrat opted to retain ties with Britain, while Guyana achieved independence in 1966. Britain's last colony on the American mainland, British Honduras, became a self-governing colony in 1964 and was renamed Belize in 1973, achieving full independence in 1981. A dispute with Guatemala over claims to Belize was left unresolved.\n\nBritish territories in the Pacific acquired independence in the 1970s beginning with Fiji in 1970 and ending with Vanuatu in 1980. Vanuatu's independence was delayed because of political conflict between English and French-speaking communities, as the islands had been jointly administered as a condominium with France. Fiji, Tuvalu, the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea chose to become Commonwealth realms.\n\nIn 1980, Southern Rhodesia, Britain's last African colony, became the independent nation of Zimbabwe. The New Hebrides achieved independence (as Vanuatu) in 1980, with Belize following suit in 1981. The passage of the British Nationality Act 1981, which reclassified the remaining Crown colonies as \"British Dependent Territories\" (renamed British Overseas Territories in 2002) meant that, aside from a scattering of islands and outposts, the process of decolonisation that had begun after the Second World War was largely complete. In 1982, Britain's resolve in defending its remaining overseas territories was tested when Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands, acting on a long-standing claim that dated back to the Spanish Empire. Britain's ultimately successful military response to retake the islands during the ensuing Falklands War was viewed by many to have contributed to reversing the downward trend in Britain's status as a world power. The same year, the Canadian government severed its last legal link with Britain by patriating the Canadian constitution from Britain. The 1982 Canada Act passed by the British parliament ended the need for British involvement in changes to the Canadian constitution. Similarly, the Constitution Act 1986 reformed the constitution of New Zealand to sever its constitutional link with Britain, and the Australia Act 1986 severed the constitutional link between Britain and the Australian states. In 1984, Brunei, Britain's last remaining Asian protectorate, gained its independence.\n\nIn September 1982 the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, travelled to Beijing to negotiate with the Chinese government, on the future of Britain's last major and most populous overseas territory, Hong Kong. Under the terms of the 1842 Treaty of Nanking, Hong Kong Island itself had been ceded to Britain \"in perpetuity\", but the vast majority of the colony was constituted by the New Territories, which had been acquired under a 99-year lease in 1898, due to expire in 1997. Thatcher, seeing parallels with the Falkland Islands, initially wished to hold Hong Kong and proposed British administration with Chinese sovereignty, though this was rejected by China. A deal was reached in 1984—under the terms of the Sino-British Joint Declaration, Hong Kong would become a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China, maintaining its way of life for at least 50 years. The handover ceremony in 1997 marked for many, including Charles, Prince of Wales, who was in attendance, \"the end of Empire\".\n\nThe following table gives gross domestic product (GDP) estimates of the British Empire and its territories in 1870 and 1913, as a percentage of the world economy and the empire's economy, along with comparisons to the United States and Russian Empire. The British imperial territory with the largest economy in 1870 was British India (including what are now Pakistan and Bangladesh), followed by the United Kingdom. The territory with the largest economy in 1913 was the United Kingdom, followed by British India. The table does not include GDP estimates for British African territories other than British Egypt.\n\nThe following table gives the population of the British Empire and its territories, in several different time periods. The most populous territory in the empire was British India, which included what are now Pakistan and Bangladesh.\n\nThe empire's population was classified into white people, also referred to as Europeans, and non-white people, variously referred to as persons of colour, negros and natives. The largest ethnic grouping in the empire was Indians (including what are now Pakistanis and Bangladeshis), who were classified into a number of individual South Asian ethnic groups. The following table gives the population figures for white people and people of colour, in the empire and its territories, in 1814 and 1901.\n\nThe following table gives the population figures for the religions in the British Empire in 1901. The most populous religion in the empire was Hinduism, followed by Islam.\n\nBritain retains sovereignty over 14 territories outside the British Isles, which were renamed the British Overseas Territories in 2002. Four are uninhabited except for transient military or scientific personnel ; the remaining ten are self-governing to varying degrees and are reliant on the UK for foreign relations and defence. The British government has stated its willingness to assist any Overseas Territory that wishes to proceed to independence, where that is an option, and three territories have specifically voted to remain under British sovereignty (Bermuda in 1995, Gibraltar in 2002 and the Falkland Islands in 2013).\n\nBritish sovereignty of several of the overseas territories is disputed by their geographical neighbours: Gibraltar is claimed by Spain, the Falkland Islands and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands are claimed by Argentina, and the British Indian Ocean Territory is claimed by Mauritius and Seychelles. The British Antarctic Territory is subject to overlapping claims by Argentina and Chile, while many countries do not recognise any territorial claims in Antarctica.\n\nMost former British colonies and protectorates are among the 52 member states of the Commonwealth of Nations, a non-political, voluntary association of equal members, comprising a population of around 2.2 billion people. Sixteen Commonwealth realms voluntarily continue to share the British monarch, Queen Elizabeth II, as their head of state. These sixteen nations are distinct and equal legal entities – the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Grenada, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu.\nDecades, and in some cases centuries, of British rule and emigration have left their mark on the independent nations that arose from the British Empire. The empire established the use of English in regions around the world. Today it is the primary language of up to 400 million people and is spoken by about one and a half billion as a first, second or foreign language.\n\nThe spread of English from the latter half of the 20th century has been helped in part by the cultural and economic influence of the United States, itself originally formed from British colonies. Except in Africa where nearly all the former colonies have adopted the presidential system, the English parliamentary system has served as the template for the governments for many former colonies, and English common law for legal systems.\nThe British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council still serves as the highest court of appeal for several former colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific. British Protestant missionaries who travelled around the globe often in advance of soldiers and civil servants spread the Anglican Communion to all continents. British colonial architecture, such as in churches, railway stations and government buildings, can be seen in many cities that were once part of the British Empire.\n\nIndividual and team sports developed in Britain — particularly golf, football, cricket, rugby, netball, lawn bowls, hockey and lawn tennis — were also exported. The British choice of system of measurement, the imperial system, continues to be used in some countries in various ways. The convention of driving on the left hand side of the road has been retained in much of the former empire.\n\nPolitical boundaries drawn by the British did not always reflect homogeneous ethnicities or religions, contributing to conflicts in formerly colonised areas. The British Empire was also responsible for large migrations of peoples. Millions left the British Isles, with the founding settler populations of the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand coming mainly from Britain and Ireland. Tensions remain between the white settler populations of these countries and their indigenous minorities, and between white settler minorities and indigenous majorities in South Africa and Zimbabwe. Settlers in Ireland from Great Britain have left their mark in the form of divided nationalist and unionist communities in Northern Ireland. Millions of people moved to and from British colonies, with large numbers of Indians emigrating to other parts of the empire, such as Malaysia and Fiji, and Chinese people to Malaysia, Singapore and the Caribbean. The demographics of Britain itself was changed after the Second World War owing to immigration to Britain from its former colonies.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4726", "title": "Batman (1989 film)", "text": "Batman (1989 film)\n\nBatman is a 1989 American superhero film directed by Tim Burton and produced by Jon Peters and Peter Guber, based on the DC Comics character of the same name. It is the first installment of Warner Bros.' initial \"Batman\" film series. The film stars Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne/Batman and Jack Nicholson as The Joker, alongside Kim Basinger, Robert Wuhl, Pat Hingle, Billy Dee Williams, Michael Gough and Jack Palance. The film takes place early in the title character's war on crime, and depicts a battle with his arch-nemesis the Joker.\n\nAfter Burton was hired as director in 1986, Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay. \"Batman\" was not greenlit until after the success of Burton's \"Beetlejuice\" (1988). Numerous A-list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Keaton was cast. Keaton's casting caused a controversy since, by 1988, he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role. Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary, a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule.\n\nThe tone and themes of the film were influenced in part by Alan Moore and Brian Bolland's \"\" and Frank Miller's \"The Dark Knight Returns\". The film primarily adapts the \"Red Hood\" origin story for the Joker, in which Batman creates the Joker by dropping him into Axis Chemical acid, resulting in his transformation into a psychopath, but it adds a unique twist in presenting him specifically as a gangster named Jack Napier. Filming took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989. The budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million, while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out. Warren Skaaren did rewrites. Additional uncredited drafts were done by Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems.\n\n\"Batman\" was a critical and financial success, earning over $400 million in box office totals. It was the fifth-highest-grossing film in history at the time of its release. The film received several Saturn Award nominations and a Golden Globe nomination, and won an Academy Award. It also inspired the equally successful \"\", paving the way for the DC animated universe, and has influenced Hollywood's modern marketing and development techniques of the superhero film genre. Three sequels, \"Batman Returns\", \"Batman Forever\" and \"Batman & Robin\", were released on June 19, 1992, June 16, 1995, and June 20, 1997, respectively.\n\nAs Gotham City approaches its bicentennial, Mayor Borg orders district attorney Harvey Dent and police commissioner James Gordon to make the city safer. Meanwhile, reporter Alexander Knox and photojournalist Vicki Vale begin to investigate rumors of a vigilante nicknamed \"Batman\" who is targeting the city's criminals.\n\nBatman's alter-ego is Bruce Wayne, a billionaire industrialist who, as a child, witnessed his parents' murder at the hands of a psychotic mugger. At a fundraiser for the bicentennial in Wayne Manor, Bruce meets and falls for Vale, and the two begin a romantic relationship. However, the evening is cut short as Bruce is alerted to Commissioner Gordon's sudden departure due to police business and leaves to investigate as Batman.\n\nMob boss Carl Grissom, who has already been targeted by Dent, discovers his mistress Alicia is involved with his second-in-command Jack Napier. With the help of corrupt police lieutenant Max Eckhardt, Grissom sets Napier up to be killed in a raid at Axis Chemicals. However, Grissom's plan is foiled with the arrival of Commissioner Gordon, who wants Napier captured alive. In the ensuing shootout, Napier, who has realized he was setup, kills Eckhardt, but Batman suddenly appears and, in a struggle, Napier is knocked into a vat of chemicals. Batman escapes and Napier is presumed dead.\n\nAs Batman returns to his life as Bruce Wayne, Napier is revealed to have survived the accident, but left disfigured with chalk white skin, emerald green hair, and a ruby red grin. Already sociopathic, Napier is driven completely insane by the incident and calls himself \"the Joker\", killing Grissom and taking over his criminal empire.\n\nThe Joker begins to terrorize Gotham City by lacing hygiene products with \"\"Smilex\"\", a deadly chemical which causes victims to die laughing with the same maniacal grin as the Joker. Whilst searching for information on Batman, the Joker also becomes obsessed with Vale. He lures her to the Gotham Museum of Art and his henchmen destroys the works of art, but Batman arrives and rescues her. They escape in the Batmobile, but are pursued by the Joker's men, whom Batman manages to defeat. Batman takes Vicki to the Batcave, where he gives her information from his research on Smilex that will allow the city's residents to protect themselves from the toxin. Furious, the Joker vows to kill Batman.\n\nBruce visits Vicki at her apartment, prepared to tell her about his alter-ego, but the Joker interrupts their meeting, asking Bruce, \"Have you ever danced with the devil by the pale moonlight?\" before shooting him. Bruce, however, survives and escapes, as he used a bended serving tray as a body armor. He remembers that the mugger who killed his parents asked the same question, and realizes that Napier was his parents' killer. Vicki suddenly appears in the Batcave, having been let in by Bruce's butler, Alfred Pennyworth. After telling her that he cannot focus on their relationship with the Joker terrorizing Gotham, Bruce departs as Batman to destroy the Axis plant. Meanwhile, the Joker lures the citizens of Gotham to a parade with the promise of free money, but while throwing cash at the crowd as promised, also attacks them with Smilex gas released from his giant parade balloons. Batman arrives and saves them using the Batwing. Furious, the Joker shoots the Batwing using a long-barreled gun, causing it to crash.\n\nThe Joker kidnaps Vicki and takes her to the top of a cathedral. Batman, who survived the crash, fends off the Joker's remaining men despite his injuries, and confronts the Joker. The two struggle, with Joker eventually gaining the upper hand, leaving Batman and Vicki clinging onto an outcropping. The Joker tries to escape by helicopter, but Batman attaches a heavy granite gargoyle to the Joker's leg with his grappling hook, causing him to lose his grip and fall to his death after it breaks off.\n\nCommissioner Gordon announces that the police have arrested the Joker's men and unveils the Bat-Signal. Harvey Dent reads a note from Batman, promising that he will defend Gotham whenever crime strikes again. Vicki is taken to Wayne Manor by Alfred, who tells her that Bruce will be a little late. She responds by claiming that she is not a bit surprised, as Batman looks at the signal's projection, standing watch over the city.\n\nIn the late 1970s, Batman's popularity was waning. CBS was interested in producing a \"Batman in Outer Space\" film. Producers Benjamin Melniker and Michael E. Uslan purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3, 1979. It was Uslan's wish \"to make the definitive, dark, serious version of Batman, the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939. A creature of the night; stalking criminals in the shadows.\" Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct, but the two turned down the offer. Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching \"Batman\" to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series. Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film.\n\nA disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled \"Return of the Batman\" to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film. Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of \"The Dark Knight Returns\", which his script pre-dated by six years. In November 1979, producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber joined the project. Melniker and Uslan became executive producers. The four felt it was best to pattern the film's development after that of \"Superman\" (1978). Uslan, Melniker and Guber pitched \"Batman\" to Universal Pictures, but the studio turned it down. Though no movie studios were yet involved, the project was publicly announced with a budget of $15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York. Warner Bros. decided to accept \"Batman\".\n\nTom Mankiewicz completed a script titled \"The Batman\" in June 1983, focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson's origins, with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains, and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest. Mankiewicz took inspiration from the limited series \"Batman: Strange Apparitions\", written by Steve Englehart. Comic book artist Marshall Rogers, who worked with Englehart on \"Strange Apparitions\", was hired for concept art. \"The Batman\" was then announced in late 1983 for a mid-1985 release date on a budget of $20 million. Originally, Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman, William Holden for James Gordon, David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth, and Peter O'Toole as the Penguin, whom Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature. Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983, so this would never come to pass. A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz' script, including Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante. Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman and Eddie Murphy as Robin. Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers. Most of them were based on \"Strange Apparitions\". However, it was Mankiewicz's script that was still being used to guide the project.\n\nAfter the financial success of \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\" (1985), Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct \"Batman\". Burton had then-girlfriend Julie Hickson write a new 30-page film treatment, feeling the previous script by Mankiewicz was campy. The success of \"The Dark Knight Returns\" and \"\" rekindled Warner Bros.' interest in a film adaptation. Burton was initially not a comic book fan, but he was impressed by the dark and serious tone found in both \"The Dark Knight Returns\" and \"The Killing Joke\". Warner Bros. enlisted the aid of Englehart to write a new treatment in March 1986. Like Mankiewicz's script, it was based on his own \"Strange Apparitions\", and included Silver St. Cloud, Dick Grayson, the Joker and Rupert Thorne, as well as a cameo appearance by the Penguin. Warner Bros. was impressed, but Englehart felt there were too many characters. He removed the Penguin and Dick Grayson in his second treatment, finishing in May 1986.\n\nBurton approached Sam Hamm, a comic book fan, to write the screenplay. Hamm decided not to use an origin story, feeling that flashbacks would be more suitable and that \"unlocking the mystery\" would become part of the storyline. He reasoned, \"You totally destroy your credibility if you show the literal process by which Bruce Wayne becomes Batman.\" Hamm replaced Silver St. Cloud with Vicki Vale and Rupert Thorne with his own creation, Carl Grissom. He completed his script in October 1986, which demoted Dick Grayson to a cameo rather than a supporting character. One scene in Hamm's script had a young James Gordon on duty the night of the murder of Bruce Wayne's parents. When Hamm's script was rewritten, the scene was deleted, reducing it to a photo in the \"Gotham Globe\" newspaper seen in the film.\n\nWarner Bros. was less willing to move forward on development, despite their enthusiasm for Hamm's script, which Batman co-creator Bob Kane greeted with positive feedback. Hamm's script was then bootlegged at various comic book stores in the United States. \"Batman\" was finally given the greenlight to commence pre-production in April 1988, after the success of Burton's \"Beetlejuice\" (1988). When comic book fans found out about Burton directing the film with Michael Keaton starring in the lead role, controversy arose over the tone and direction \"Batman\" was going in. Hamm explained, \"They hear Tim Burton's name and they think of \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\". They hear Keaton's name and they think of any number of Michael Keaton comedies. You think of the 1960s version of \"Batman\", and it was the complete opposite of our film. We tried to market it with a typical dark and serious tone, but the fans didn't believe us.\" To combat negative reports on the film's production, Kane was hired as creative consultant.\n\nParallel to the \"Superman\" casting, a who's who of Hollywood top stars were considered for the role of Batman, including Mel Gibson, Kevin Costner, Charlie Sheen, Tom Selleck, Bill Murray, Harrison Ford and Dennis Quaid. Burton was pressured by Warner Bros. to cast an obvious action movie star, and had approached Pierce Brosnan, but he had no interest in playing a comic book character. Burton was originally interested in casting an unknown actor, and offered Ray Liotta a chance to audition after having completed \"Something Wild\", but Liotta declined, a decision he regrets. Willem Dafoe, who was falsely reported to be considered for the Joker, had actually been considered for Batman early in development. Producer Jon Peters suggested Michael Keaton, arguing he had the right \"edgy, tormented quality\" after having seen his dramatic performance in \"Clean and Sober\". Having directed Keaton in \"Beetlejuice\", Burton agreed.\n\nKeaton's casting caused a controversy among comic book fans, with 50,000 protest letters sent to Warner Bros. offices. Bob Kane, Sam Hamm and Michael Uslan also heavily questioned the casting. \"Obviously there was a negative response from the comic book people. I think they thought we were going to make it like the 1960s TV series, and make it campy, because they thought of Michael Keaton from \"Mr. Mom\" and \"Night Shift\" and stuff like that.\" Keaton studied \"The Dark Knight Returns\" for inspiration.\n\nBrad Dourif, Tim Curry, David Bowie, John Lithgow and James Woods were considered for the Joker. Lithgow, during his audition, attempted to talk Burton out of casting him, a decision he would later publicly regret, stating, \"I didn’t realize it was such a big deal\". Burton wanted to cast Brad Dourif, but the studio refused. Robin Williams lobbied hard for the part. Jack Nicholson had been producer Michael Uslan's and Bob Kane's choice since 1980. Peters approached Nicholson as far back as 1986, during filming of \"The Witches of Eastwick\". Nicholson had what was known as an \"off-the-clock\" agreement. His contract specified the number of hours he was entitled to have off each day, from the time he left the set to the time he reported back for filming, as well as being off for Los Angeles Lakers home games. Nicholson demanded to have all of his scenes shot in a three-week block, but the schedule lapsed into 106 days. He received a $6 million salary, as well as a large percentage of the box office gross estimated between $60 million to $90 million.\n\nSean Young was originally cast as Vicki Vale, but was injured in a horse-riding accident prior to commencement of filming. Young's departure necessitated an urgent search for an actress who, besides being right for the part, could commit to the film at very short notice. Peters suggested Kim Basinger: she was able to join the production immediately and was cast. As a fan of Michael Gough's work in various Hammer Film Productions, Burton cast Gough as Bruce Wayne's butler, Alfred Pennyworth. Robert Wuhl was cast as reporter Alexander Knox. His character was originally supposed to die by the Joker's poison gas in the climax, but the filmmakers \"liked [my] character so much,\" Wuhl said, \"that they decided to let me live.\" Burton chose Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent because he wanted to include the villain Two-Face in a future film using the concept of an African-American Two-Face for the black and white concept, but Tommy Lee Jones was later cast in the role for \"Batman Forever\", which disappointed Williams. Nicholson convinced the filmmakers to cast his close friend Tracey Walter as the Joker's henchman, Bob. Kiefer Sutherland was considered as Robin before the character was deleted from the shooting script. The rest of the cast included Pat Hingle as Commissioner Gordon, Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt, Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg, William Hootkins as Lt. Max Eckhardt, and Jack Palance as crime boss Carl Grissom.\n\nThe filmmakers considered filming \"Batman\" entirely on the Warner Bros. backlot in Burbank, California, but media interest in the film made them change the location. It was shot at Pinewood Studios in England from October 1988 to January 1989. 18 sound stages were used, almost the entirety of Pinewood's 95-acre backlot. Locations included Knebworth House and Hatfield House doubling for Wayne Manor, plus Acton Lane Power Station and Little Barford Power Station. The original production budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million. Filming was highly secretive. The unit publicist was offered and refused £10,000 for the first pictures of Jack Nicholson as the Joker. The police were later called in when two reels of footage (about 20 minutes' worth) were stolen. With various problems during filming, Burton called it \"torture. The worst period of my life!\"\n\nHamm was not allowed to perform rewrites during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike. Warren Skaaren, who had also worked on Burton's \"Beetlejuice\", did rewrites. Jonathan Gems and Charles McKeown rewrote the script during filming. Only Skaaren received screenplay credit with Hamm. Hamm criticized the rewrites, but blamed the changes on Warner Bros. Burton explained, \"I don't understand why that became such a problem. We started out with a script that everyone liked, although we recognized it needed a little work.\" Dick Grayson appeared in the shooting script but was deleted, as the filmmakers felt he was irrelevant to the plot. Bob Kane supported this decision.\n\nKeaton, who called himself a \"logic freak\", was concerned that Batman's secret identity would in reality be fairly easy to uncover, and discussed ideas with Burton to better disguise the character, including the use of contact lenses. Ultimately, Keaton decided to perform Batman's voice at a lower register than when he was portraying Bruce Wayne, which became a hallmark of the film version of the character, with Christian Bale later using the same technique.\n\nOriginally in the climax, the Joker was to kill Vicki Vale, sending Batman into a vengeful fury. Jon Peters reworked the climax without telling Burton and commissioned production designer Anton Furst to create a model of the cathedral. This cost $100,000 when the film was already well over budget. Burton disliked the idea, having no clue how the scene would end: \"Here were Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger walking up this cathedral, and halfway up Jack turns around and says, 'Why am I walking up all these stairs? Where am I going?' 'We'll talk about it when you get to the top!' I had to tell him that I didn't know.\"\n\nBurton was impressed with Anton Furst's designs in \"The Company of Wolves\", and previously failed to hire Furst as production designer for \"Beetlejuice\". Furst had been too committed on \"High Spirits\", a choice he later regretted. Furst enjoyed working with Burton. \"I don't think I've ever felt so naturally in tune with a director\", he said. \"Conceptually, spiritually, visually, or artistically. There was never any problem because we never fought over anything. Texture, attitude and feelings are what Burton is a master at.\"\n\nFurst and the art department deliberately mixed clashing architectural styles to \"make Gotham City the ugliest and bleakest metropolis imaginable\". Furst continued, \"[W]e imagined what New York City might have become without a planning commission. A city run by crime, with a riot of architectural styles. An essay in ugliness. As if hell erupted through the pavement and kept on going\". The 1985 film \"Brazil\" by Terry Gilliam was also a notable influence upon the film's production design, as both Burton and Furst studied it as a reference. Derek Meddings served as the visual effects supervisor, while Keith Short helped construct the newly created 1989 Batmobile, adding two Browning machine guns. On designing the Batmobile, Furst explained, \"We looked at jet aircraft components, we looked at war machines, we looked at all sorts of things. In the end, we went into pure expressionism, taking the Salt Flat Racers of the 30s and the Sting Ray macho machines of the 50s\". The car was built upon a Chevrolet Impala when previous development with a Jaguar and Ford Mustang failed.\n\nCostume designer Bob Ringwood turned down the chance to work on \"Licence to Kill\" in favor of \"Batman\". Ringwood found it difficult designing the Batsuit because \"the image of Batman in the comics is this huge, big six-foot-four hunk with a dimpled chin. Michael Keaton is a guy with average build\", he stated. \"The problem was to make somebody who was average-sized and ordinary-looking into this bigger-than-life creature.\" Burton commented, \"Michael is a bit claustrophobic, which made it worse for him. The costume put him in a dark, Batman-like mood though, so he was able to use it to his advantage\". Burton's idea was to use an all-black suit, and was met with positive feedback by Bob Kane. Jon Peters wanted to use a Nike product placement with the Batsuit. Ringwood studied over 200 comic book issues for inspiration. 28 sculpted latex designs were created; 25 different cape looks and 6 different heads were made, accumulating a total cost of $250,000. Comic book fans initially expressed negative feedback against the Batsuit. Burton opted not to use tights, spandex, or underpants as seen in the comic book, feeling it was not intimidating. Prosthetic makeup designer Nick Dudman used acrylic-based makeup paint called PAX for Nicholson's chalk-white face. Part of Nicholson's contract was approval over the makeup designer.\n\nBurton hired Danny Elfman, his collaborator on \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\" and \"Beetlejuice\", to compose the music score. For inspiration, Elfman was given \"The Dark Knight Returns\". Elfman was worried, as he had never worked on a production this large in budget and scale. In addition, producer Jon Peters was skeptical of hiring Elfman, but was later convinced when he heard the opening number. Peters and Peter Guber wanted Prince to write music for the Joker and Michael Jackson to do the romance songs. Elfman would then combine the style of Prince and Jackson's songs together for the entire film score.\n\nBurton protested the ideas, citing \"my movies aren't commercial like \"Top Gun\".\" Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange the compositions for the orchestra. Elfman was later displeased with the audio mixing of his film score. \"\"Batman\" was done in England by technicians who didn't care, and the non-caring showed,\" he stated. \"I'm not putting down England because they've done gorgeous dubs there, but this particular crew elected not to.\" \"Batman\" was one of the first films to spawn two soundtracks. One of them featured songs written by Prince while the other showcased Elfman's score. Both were successful, and compilations of Elfman's opening credits were used in the title sequence theme for \"\", also composed by Shirley Walker.\n\nWhen discussing the central theme of \"Batman\", director Tim Burton explained, \"the whole film and mythology of the character is a complete duel of the freaks. It's a fight between two disturbed people\", adding that \"The Joker is such a great character because there's a complete freedom to him. Any character who operates on the outside of society and is deemed a freak and an outcast then has the freedom to do what they want... They are the darker sides of freedom. Insanity is in some scary way the most freedom you can have, because you're not bound by the laws of society\".\n\nBurton saw Bruce Wayne as the bearer of a double identity, exposing one while hiding the reality from the world. Burton biographer Ken Hanke wrote that Bruce Wayne, struggling with his alter-ego as Batman, is depicted as an antihero. Hanke felt that Batman has to push the boundaries of civil justice to deal with certain criminals, such as the Joker. Kim Newman theorized that \"Burton and the writers saw Batman and the Joker as a dramatic antithesis, and the film deals with their intertwined origins and fates to an even greater extent\".\n\n\"Batman\" conveys trademarks found in 1930s pulp magazines, notably the design of Gotham City stylized with Art Deco design. Richard Corliss, writing for \"Time\", observed that Gotham's design was a reference to films such as \"Metropolis\" (1927) and \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920). \"Gotham City, despite being shot on a studio backlot\", he continued, \"is literally another character in the script. It has the demeaning presence of German Expressionism and fascist architecture, staring down at the citizens.\" Hanke further addressed the notions of \"Batman\" being a period piece, in that \"The citizens, cops, people and the black-and-white television looks like it takes place in 1939\"; but later said: \"Had the filmmakers made Vicki Vale a femme fatale rather than a damsel in distress, this could have made \"Batman\" as a homage and tribute to classic film noir.\" Portions of the climax pay homage to \"Vertigo\".\n\nProduction designer Anton Furst designed the poster, which he called \"evocative but ubiquitous. Only featuring the Bat-Symbol. Not too much and not too little\". Earlier designs \"had the word 'Batman' spelled in \"RoboCop\" or \"Conan the Barbarian\"-type font\". Jon Peters unified all the film's tie-ins, even turning down $6 million from General Motors to build the Batmobile because the car company would not relinquish creative control.\n\nDuring production, Peters read in \"The Wall Street Journal\" that comic book fans were unsatisfied with the casting of Michael Keaton. In response, Peters rushed the first film trailer that played in thousands of theaters during Christmas. It was simply an assemblage of scenes without music, but happened to create enormous anticipation for the film. DC Comics allowed screenwriter Sam Hamm to write his own comic book miniseries. Hamm's stories were collected in the graphic novel \"Batman: Blind Justice\" (). Denys Cowan and Dick Giordano illustrated the artwork. \"Blind Justice\" tells the story of Bruce Wayne trying to solve a series of murders connected to Wayne Enterprises. It also marks the first appearance of Henri Ducard, who was later used in the rebooted \"Batman Begins\", albeit as an alias for the more notable Ra's al Ghul.\n\nIn the months pre-dating \"Batman\"s release in June 1989, a popular culture phenomenon rose known as \"Batmania\". Over $750 million worth of merchandise was sold. Cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith remembered: \"That summer was huge. You couldn't turn around without seeing the Bat-Signal somewhere. People were cutting it into their fucking heads. It was just the summer of Batman and if you were a comic book fan it was pretty hot.\" Hachette Book Group USA published a novelization, \"Batman\" written by Craig Shaw Gardner. It remained on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list throughout June 1989. Burton admitted he was annoyed by the publicity. David Handelman of \"The New York Observer\" categorized \"Batman\" as a high concept film. He believed \"it is less movie than a corporate behemoth\".\n\n\"Batman\" opened on June 23, 1989, grossing $43.6 million in 2,194 theaters during its opening weekend. This broke the opening weekend record, set by \"Ghostbusters II\" one week earlier, with $29.4 million. The film closed on December 14, 1989, with a final gross $251.2 million in North America and $160.15 million internationally, totaling $411.35 million. \"Batman\" was the first film to earn $100 million in its first ten days of release, and was the highest grossing film based on a DC comic book until 2008's \"The Dark Knight\". The film's gross is the 66th highest ever in North American ranks. Although \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" made the most money worldwide in 1989, \"Batman\" was able to beat \"The Last Crusade\" in North America, and made a further $150 million in home video sales. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 60 million tickets in the US.\n\n\"Batman\" was criticized by some for being too dark, but nonetheless received positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 72% based on 68 reviews, with an average rating of 6.6/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"An eerie, haunting spectacle, \"Batman\" succeeds as dark entertainment, even if Jack Nicholson's Joker too often overshadows the title character.\" Metacritic gives an aggregated score of 66 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\nMany observed that Burton was more interested in the Joker and the art and set production design than Batman or anything else in terms of characterization and screentime. Comic book fans reacted negatively over the Joker murdering Thomas and Martha Wayne; in the comic book, Joe Chill is responsible. Writer Sam Hamm said it was Burton's idea to have the Joker murder Wayne's parents. \"The Writer's Strike was going on, and Tim had the other writers do that. I also hold innocent to Alfred letting Vicki Vale into the Batcave. Fans were ticked off with that, and I agree. That would have been Alfred's last day of employment at Wayne Manor,\" Hamm said.\n\nThe songs written by Prince were criticized for being \"too out of place\". While Burton has stated he had no problem with the Prince songs, he was less enthusiastic with their use in the film. On the film, Burton remarked, \"I liked parts of it, but the whole movie is mainly boring to me. It's OK, but it was more of a cultural phenomenon than a great movie.\"\n\nDespite initial negative reactions from comics fans prior to the film's release, Keaton's portrayal of Batman was generally praised. James Berardinelli called the film entertaining, with the highlight being the production design. However, he concluded, \"the best thing that can be said about \"Batman\" is that it led to \"Batman Returns\", which was a far superior effort.\" \"Variety\" felt \"Jack Nicholson stole every scene\" but still greeted the film with positive feedback. Roger Ebert was highly impressed with the production design, but claimed \"\"Batman\" is a triumph of design over story, style over substance, a great-looking movie with a plot you can't care much about.\" He also called the film \"a depressing experience\". His reviewing partner Gene Siskel disagreed, describing the film as having a 'refreshingly adult' approach with performances, direction and set design that 'draws you into a psychological world'.\n\nAnton Furst and Peter Young won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction, while Nicholson was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor (Musical or Comedy). The British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated \"Batman\" in six categories (Production Design, Visual Effects, Costume Design, Makeup, Sound and Actor in a Supporting Role for Nicholson), but it won none of the categories. Nicholson, Basinger, the makeup department, and costume designer Bob Ringwood all received nominations at the Saturn Awards. The film was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.\n\nThe success of \"Batman\" prompted Warner Bros. Animation to create the acclaimed \"\", as a result beginning the long-running DC animated universe and helped establish the modern day superhero film genre. Series co-creator Bruce Timm stated the television show's Art Deco design was inspired from the film. Timm commented, \"our show would never have gotten made if it hadn't been for that first \"Batman\" movie.\" Burton joked, \"ever since I did \"Batman\", it was like the first dark comic book movie. Now everyone wants to do a dark and serious superhero movie. I guess I'm the one responsible for that trend.\"\n\n\"Batman\" initiated the original \"Batman\" film series and spawned three sequels: \"Batman Returns\" (1992), \"Batman Forever\" (1995) and \"Batman & Robin\" (1997); the latter two of which were directed by Joel Schumacher instead of Burton, and replaced Keaton as Batman with Val Kilmer and George Clooney, respectively.\n\nExecutive producers Benjamin Melniker and Michael E. Uslan filed a breach of contract lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court on March 26, 1992. Melniker and Uslan claimed to be \"the victims of a sinister campaign of fraud and coercion that has cheated them out of continuing involvement in the production of \"Batman\" and its sequels. We were denied proper credits, and deprived of any financial rewards for our indispensable creative contribution to the success of \"Batman\".\" A superior court judge rejected the lawsuit. Total revenues of \"Batman\" have topped $2 billion, with Uslan claiming to have \"not seen a penny more than that since our net profit participation has proved worthless.\" Warner Bros. offered the pair an out-of-court pay-off, a sum described by Melniker and Uslan's attorney as \"two popcorns and two Cokes\".\n\nReflecting on the twentieth anniversary of its release in a retrospective article on Salon.com, film commentator Scott Mendelson noted the continuing impact that \"Batman\" has had on the motion film industry, including the increasing importance of opening weekend box office receipts; the narrowing window between a film's debut and its video release that caused the demise of second-run movie theaters; the accelerated acquisition of pre-existing, pre-sold properties for film adaptations that can be readily leveraged for merchandizing tie-ins; the primacy of the MPAA PG-13 as the target rating for film producers; and more off-beat, non-traditional casting opportunities for genre films.\n\nThe American Film Institute anointed Batman the 46th greatest movie hero and the Joker the 45th greatest movie villain on \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains\".\n\n\nMany versions of the film have been released. Included are VHS, Laserdisc, single-disc DVD, special edition DVD and an anthology set. The \"Batman: The Motion Picture Anthology\" released in 2005 included 2-disc special edition DVDs of the Tim Burton/Joel Schumacher \"Batman\" films. This anthology set was re-released on Blu-ray on March 10, 2009.\n\nOn May 19, 2009 a 20th anniversary stand-alone edition was released. This stand-alone version contains exactly the same special features as its anthology set (both DVD and Blu-ray) counterparts. There are two differences: This version includes a 50-page booklet guide to the film, and a slight variation in packaging from normal Blu-ray cases (i.e. a Warner Bros. digibook). They both include a digital copy of the film.\n\nWarner Bros. also released the 25th anniversary edition on Blu Ray on December 20, 2014 with all of the same special features shown on DVD and Blu Ray and comes with a new featurette called \"Batman: The Birth of the Modern Blockbuster\".\n\nThe film was also included in \"The Tim Burton Collection\" DVD/Blu-ray set in 2012, alongside its sequel, \"Batman Returns\", and several other Burton films.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4727", "title": "Batman (1966 film)", "text": "Batman (1966 film)\n\nBatman (often promoted as Batman: The Movie) is a 1966 American superhero film based on the \"Batman\" television series, and the first full-length theatrical adaptation of the DC Comics character Batman. Released by 20th Century Fox, the film starred Adam West as Batman and Burt Ward as Robin. The film hit theaters two months after the of the television series. The film includes most members of the original TV cast, with the exception of Lee Meriwether as the Catwoman, the character previously played by Julie Newmar in two episodes of the series' first season.\n\nWhen Batman and Robin get a tip that Commodore Schmidlapp is in danger aboard his yacht, they launch a rescue mission using the batcopter. As Batman descends on the bat-ladder to land on the yacht, it suddenly vanishes beneath him. He rises out of the sea with a shark attacking his leg. After Batman dislodges it with bat-shark repellent, the shark explodes. Batman and Robin head back to Commissioner Gordon's office, where they deduce that the tip was a set-up by the United Underworld, a gathering of four of the most powerful villains in Gotham City (The Joker, The Penguin, The Riddler, and The Catwoman).\n\nThe United Underworld equip themselves with a dehydrator that can turn humans into dust (an invention of Schmidlapp, who is unaware he has been kidnapped), a submarine made to resemble a penguin, and their three pirate henchmen (Bluebeard, Morgan and Quetch). It is revealed the yacht was really a projection. When Batman and Robin return to a buoy concealing a projector, they are trapped on the buoy by a magnet and targeted by torpedoes. They use a radio-detonator to destroy two of the missiles, and a porpoise sacrifices itself to intercept the last one. The Catwoman, disguised as Soviet journalist \"Miss Kitka\", helps the group kidnap Bruce Wayne and pretends to be kidnapped with him, as part of a plot to lure Batman and finish him off with another of the Penguin's explosive animals (not knowing that Bruce Wayne is Batman's alter-ego). After Bruce Wayne escapes captivity, the Penguin disguises himself as the Commodore and schemes his way into the Batcave along with five dehydrated henchmen. This plan fails when the henchmen unexpectedly disappear into antimatter once struck: The Penguin mistakenly rehydrated them with toxic heavy water, used to recharge the Batcave's atomic pile.\n\nUltimately, Batman and Robin are unable to prevent the kidnapping of the dehydrated United World Organization's Security Council. Giving chase in the batboat to retrieve them (and Miss Kitka, presumed by the duo as still captive), Robin uses a sonic charge weapon to disable Penguin's submarine and force it to surface, where a fist fight ensues. Although Batman and Robin win the fight, Batman is heartbroken to find out that his \"true love\" Miss Kitka is actually the Catwoman when her mask falls off. Commodore Schmidlapp accidentally breaks the vials containing the powdered Council members, mixing them together.\n\nBatman sets to work, constructing an elaborate filter to separate the mingled dust. Robin asks him whether it might be in the world's best interests for them to alter the dust samples, so that humans can no longer harm one another. In response, Batman says that they cannot do so, reminding Robin of the fate of the Penguin's henchmen and their tainted rehydration, and can only hope for people in general to learn to live together peacefully on their own.\n\nWith the world watching, the Security Council is re-hydrated. All of the members are restored alive and well, continuing to squabble among themselves and totally oblivious of their surroundings, but each of them now speaks the language and displays the stereotypical mannerisms of a nation other than their own. Batman quietly expresses his sincere hope to Robin that this \"mixing of minds\" does more good than it does harm. The duo quietly leave United World Headquarters by climbing out of the window.\n\nThe film includes most members of the original TV cast: the actors for Batman, Robin, Alfred, Gordon, O'Hara, Aunt Harriet, the Joker, the Penguin, and the Riddler all reprised their roles. Though Julie Newmar had at this point played the Catwoman in two episodes of in the TV series, she had other commitments at that time and was replaced by Lee Meriwether in the film. According to the 2004 Biography special celebrating the character of the Catwoman it was said that Newmar was unable to reprise her role due to a reported back injury. The Catwoman was nonetheless played by Newmar once again in the following eleven episodes of of the series; Eartha Kitt would then play The Catwoman in three episodes of .\n\nIn his autobiography, Adam West writes of his asking for more money to do the film and that the producers countered with the fact that another actor would be hired. \"Batman\" was Denny's final film appearance. Jack LaLanne has a cameo as a man on a rooftop with bikini-clad women.\n\nWilliam Dozier wanted to make a big-screen film to generate interest in his proposed Batman TV series by having the feature in theaters while the first season of the series was rolling before the cameras. The studio, 20th Century Fox, refused because it would have to cover the entire cost of a movie, while it would only have to share the cost of a TV series (a much less risky proposition).\n\nThe film features many characters from the show. It was written by series writer Lorenzo Semple, Jr. and directed by Leslie H. Martinson. Martinson had directed a pair of the television series season one episodes: \"The Penguin Goes Straight\" and \"Not Yet, He Ain't\".\n\nEven though it is often described (like many contemporary shows) as a parody of a popular comic-book character, some commentators believe that its comedy is not so tightly confined. They felt the film's depiction of the Caped Crusader \"captured the feel of the contemporary comics perfectly\". The film was, they remind us, made at a time when \"the Batman of the Golden Age comics was already essentially neutered.\"\n\nCertain elements verge into direct parody of the history of Batman. The movie, like the TV series, is strongly influenced by the comparatively obscure 1940s serials of Batman, such as the escapes done almost out of luck. The penchant for giving devices a \"Bat-\" prefix and the dramatic use of stylized title cards during fight scenes acknowledge some of the conventions that the character had accumulated in various media. However, the majority of \"Batman\"<nowiki>'s</nowiki> campier moments can be read as a broader parody on contemporary mid-1960s culture in general.\n\nFurthermore, the movie represented Batman's first major foray into Cold War issues paying heavy attention to Polaris Missiles, war surplus submarines and taking a poke at the Pentagon. The inclusion of a glory-hunting presidential character and the unfavorable portrayal of Security Council Members marked Batman's first attempts to poke fun at domestic and international politics.\n\nBesides the Batmobile, other vehicles used by The Dynamic Duo include:\n\nOf the three new Batvehicles which first appeared in the \"Batman\" film, only the Batcycle properly crossed over into the TV series as the budgetary limits of the TV series precluded the full use of the others. While the Batcopter and Batboat from the movie appeared briefly in episodes (including a use of the Batboat in the conclusion of the first post-film two-parter: \"Walk the Straight and Narrow\"), they primarily did in the form of stock-footage scenes from the film intercut into the series.\n\nNelson Riddle's original score to \"Batman the Movie\" was released in 2010 by La-La Land Records, 20th Century Fox and Fox Music. The album contains the entire score as heard in the film in chronological order as well as an unreleased cue. This limited edition includes a lavishly illustrated color booklet which features exclusive liner notes by Brian Baterwhite. This Limited Edition was of 2000 Units.\n\nIt was newly re-issued in 2016. While the program and master of this release is identical to the 2010 release, this reissue features all-new exclusive liner notes by John Takis and art design by Jim Titus. This new Limited Edition is of 2500 Units.\n\nTrack listing\n\n\n\"\"\"Bonus Tracks:\"\"\"\n\n\n\nTotal Time: 72:13\n\n\"Batman\" premiered at the Paramount Theatre in Austin, Texas on July 30, 1966 (between the first and second seasons of the TV series); it was moderately successful at the box office. The Batboat featured in the film was created by Austin-based company Glastron, whose payment was in having the film premiere in their hometown. In conjunction with the premiere, Jean Boone of Austin CBS affiliate station KTBC interviewed the film's cast, including Lee Meriwether, Cesar Romero, and Adam West.\n\nABC, the network which previously aired the \"Batman\" television series, first broadcast the film on the July 4, 1971 edition of \"The ABC Sunday Night Movie\"; the film was quickly rebroadcast on ABC September 4 of that year. The film debuted on home video via formats VHS and Betamax release in 1985 by Playhouse Video, in 1989 by CBS/Fox Video, and in 1994 by Fox Video. The film was released on DVD in 2001, and re-released July 1, 2008 on DVD and on Blu-ray.\n\nThe film has received generally positive reviews over the years. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an 80% rating based on 30 reviews, with an average rating of 6.2/10. The site's consensus states: \"\"Batman: The Movie\" elevates camp to an art form -- and has a blast doing it, every gloriously tongue-in-cheek inch of the way.\" Bill Gibron of Filmcritic.com gave the film 3 out of 5 stars: \"Unlike other attempts at bringing these characters to life...the TV cast really captures the inherent insanity of the roles.\" \"Variety\" magazine stated on their review that \"the intense innocent enthusiasm of Cesar Romero, Burgess Meredith and Frank Gorshin as the three criminals is balanced against the innocent calm of Adam West and Burt Ward, Batman and Robin respectively.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4728", "title": "Batman Returns", "text": "Batman Returns\n\nBatman Returns is a 1992 American superhero film, directed by Tim Burton, based on the DC Comics character Batman. It is the second installment of Warner Bros.' initial \"Batman\" film series, with Michael Keaton reprising the title role of Bruce Wayne/Batman. The film, produced by Denise Di Novi and Burton, introduces the characters of Max Shreck (Christopher Walken), a corrupt business tycoon who teams up with the Penguin (Danny DeVito) to take over Gotham City, as well as the character of Catwoman (Michelle Pfeiffer).\n\nBurton originally did not want to direct another Batman film. Warner Bros. developed a script with writer Sam Hamm which had the Penguin and Catwoman going after hidden treasure. Burton agreed to return after they granted him more creative control and replaced Hamm with Daniel Waters. Wesley Strick did an uncredited rewrite, removing the characters of Harvey Dent and Robin and rewriting the climax. Annette Bening was originally cast as Catwoman but became pregnant and was replaced with Pfeiffer. Filming for \"Batman Returns\" started in June 1991 at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California.\n\n\"Batman Returns\" was released on June 19, 1992. The film was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects and Best Makeup, as well as two BAFTA awards. \"Batman Returns\"s budget was $80 million and it grossed $266.8 million worldwide, making the film a financial success. The film received generally positive reviews from critics praising the action sequences, the acting, Danny Elfman's score, effects and the film's villains, though the overwhelmingly dark and depressing tone was less well received.\n\nOn a snowy Christmas night, Tucker and Esther Cobblepot throw their deformed infant child Oswald into Gotham River, fearing he would become a menace to society after attacking their pet cat. His basket floats to an abandoned zoo and is found by a rookery of penguins who raise him as one of their own.\n\n33 years later, during the lighting of Gotham Plaza's Christmas tree in Gotham City, a villainous gang of carnival performers stage a riot. While billionaire Bruce Wayne, as vigilante Batman, subdues the criminals, corrupt businessman Max Shreck falls through a trapdoor and is brought to the underground lair of Cobblepot himself, who is now the nefarious kingpin known as The Penguin. A former sideshow freak, Cobblepot explains his desire to become a respected citizen of Gotham and blackmails Shreck into helping him.\n\nMeanwhile, Shreck's secretary, Selina Kyle, inadvertently discovers her boss's plan to illegally monopolize Gotham's supply of electricity. To protect his secrets, Shreck pushes her out of his office window. Falling through several canopies, Kyle miraculously survives but lies unconscious in an alley. A group of cats swarm around her and she suddenly regains consciousness. Traumatized, Kyle develops dissociative identity disorder and, after having a mental breakdown and trashing her apartment, she fashions a black vinyl costume and whip, becoming the formidable Catwoman.\n\nShreck arranges for one of Cobblepot's men to kidnap the Mayor's infant son, allowing Cobblepot to \"rescue\" him. As a reward, Cobblepot is given access to the Gotham City Archives, where he learns his real name, and that he is the last surviving member of his family. Meanwhile, the Mayor, persuaded by Wayne, refuses to give Shreck a construction permit for his power plant. Cobblepot orders his gang to attack downtown Gotham, ruining the Mayor's reputation and giving Shreck the opportunity to propose Cobblepot as a replacement. Batman confronts Cobblepot, but Catwoman appears while firebombing Shreck's department store, and Cobblepot escapes. After a fight in which Batman knocks her off a building, Catwoman survives by landing in a truck full of kitty litter.\n\nWhile Kyle enters a romantic relationship with Wayne, as Catwoman, she agrees to help Cobblepot with a plan to ruin Batman's reputation by framing him for the abduction of Gotham's \"Ice Princess\" beauty queen. While Batman traverses the rooftops in search of the Ice Princess, Penguin's goons disassemble the Batmobile and plant a device in the car that will allow Penguin to control it. Distracted by Catwoman, Batman is unable to stop Cobblepot from attacking the Princess using a swarm of captive bats. She falls to her death before Batman can save her, making everyone believe that Batman pushed her. When Catwoman rejects Cobblepot's amorous advances, he responds by attacking her with his motorized helicopter umbrella. As the umbrella takes her up into the sky, Catwoman narrowly cheats death again as she falls into a rooftop greenhouse. Fleeing from the police, Batman realizes that Cobblepot is remotely controlling the Batmobile, taking it on a rampage through Gotham. Batman disables the control device, but not before recording the Penguin's mocking insults about how gullible the people of Gotham are.\n\nAt a press conference for Cobblepot organized by Shreck, Batman broadcasts the recording, destroying Cobblepot's public image. Enraged, Cobblepot flees to the sewers and orders his gang to kidnap and drown all of the first born sons of Gotham's citizens. At a masquerade ball hosted by Shreck, Wayne and Kyle deduce each other's secret identities. Cobblepot suddenly invades the party, revealing his intention to drown the kidnapped children, including Shreck's son Chip, in sewage water, prompting Shreck to offer himself instead. Batman defeats the kidnappers, prompting Cobblepot to unleash an army of penguin soldiers to destroy Gotham with missiles. Piloting the Batboat through the sewers, Batman redirects the penguins to instead fire on Cobblepot's hideout. Cobblepot attacks Batman in a rage, but ends up being attacked by bats and falling through the ceiling of his lair into the toxic water.\n\nCatwoman ambushes Shreck in a vengeful attempt to kill him, but Batman stops her and unmasks himself, as does Catwoman when she rejects Wayne's attempts to reason with her. Shreck then shoots Wayne before shooting Kyle multiple times until he runs out of bullets, leaving her severely injured, but not mortally wounded. Putting a taser to his lips, Kyle kisses Shreck while grabbing hold of an exposed power cable, causing a fiery explosion that kills Shreck. Wayne, who survived, uncovers Shreck's corpse while digging through the rubble in an attempt to find Kyle. Cobblepot, mortally wounded from his fall, then arises and tries one last time to kill Wayne with his umbrella, but fails and succumbs to his injuries. Subsequently, his penguin family carry out a makeshift funeral that culminates with them pushing his corpse into the water.\n\nAfterwards, as Alfred drives Wayne home, Wayne spots a shadow outside resembling Catwoman. He follows it and instead finds a stray black cat deciding to take it home. As he leaves, the Bat-Signal lights up in the night sky as Catwoman watches from afar.\n\nThe protector of Gotham City and the Caped Crusader. Bruce struggles with his dual identity as a crime fighter, becoming romantically involved with Selina Kyle, alias Catwoman. Keaton earned $11 million for reprising his role as the Caped Crusader as director Tim Burton thought that Keaton deserved it. \"Batman Returns\" was Keaton's final film as Batman, as he was subsequently replaced by Val Kilmer and George Clooney in \"Batman Forever\" and \"Batman & Robin\" respectively.\nA psycopathic, deformed man who was abandoned by his parents when he was a baby. Raised by penguins of an abandoned zoo, thirty-three years later, he returns for revenge along with the Red Triangle Circus Gang after being cheated by businessman Max Shreck. DeVito was suggested for the role by his friend Jack Nicholson after the financial success of the first film, in which Nicholson played The Joker. According to DeVito, \"It was four-and-a-half hours of makeup and getting into the costume. We got it down to three hours by the end of the shoot\". Dustin Hoffman was originally the first choice to play The Penguin, but he declined. Apart from Hoffman, famous actors Marlon Brando, John Candy, Bob Hoskins, Ralph Waite, Dean Martin, Dudley Moore, Alan Rickman, John Goodman, Christopher Lee, Joe Pesci, Ray Liotta, Gabriel Byrne, Alex Rocco and Christopher Lloyd were all considered for the part before DeVito got it.\nA normal woman who becomes a criminal after being almost killed by her boss Max Shreck, who later decides to try everything to kill her. She is held as a femme fatale in the most of the film. According to Michelle Pfeiffer, who was previously considered to play Vicki Vale in the previous film, she felt devastated after Annette Bening was cast as Catwoman. However, Bening became pregnant, allowing Pfeiffer to get the role. Pfeiffer's $3 million salary was $2 million more than was offered to Bening. To prepare for the role, Pfeiffer attended kickboxing classes and practised handling a whip (during which she accidentally cut her teacher's chin). Susan Sarandon, Meryl Streep (who was considered \"too old\" by Burton), Brooke Shields (who Burton considered \"not bankable\"), Demi Moore, Nicole Kidman (who ended up playing Dr. Chase Meridian in \"Batman Forever\"), Jodie Foster, Geena Davis, Sigourney Weaver, Lena Olin, singer Madonna, Raquel Welch, Cher, Ellen Barkin, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Lorraine Bracco, Bridget Fonda and Jennifer Beals were also considered for the role, but they lost out to Pfeiffer.\nA wealthy businessman and industrialist known as \"The Santa Claus of Gotham\". He is obsessed with building a power chemical plant in Gotham City, but when both Bruce Wayne and the Mayor of Gotham City deny his idea, he decides to help Oswald Cobblepot to become the new mayor of Gotham City for his plans. Apart from being the father of Chip Shreck and presumably killing his wife to gain her money, Shreck is also the former employer of Selina Kyle, who wants to kill him following his attempt to kill her. The character was created by writer Daniel Waters and named in-joke after the late German actor Max Schreck, who starred in \"Nosferatu\". Apart from this, Shreck fulfils what would have been Harvey Dent's role if Billy Dee Williams hadn't opted out this film. Singer David Bowie, who was previously considered to play The Joker in the first film, was in contention for the role of Shreck, but he declined in order to appear in David Lynch's \"\".\nThe Wayne Family's buttler and Batman's accomplice, who has helped and raised him since his parents' death. Along with Pat Hingle, Gough was one of the few actors who appeared in all four films of the initial \"Batman\" film series.\nCommissioner of the Police Department of Gotham City. Along with Michael Gough, Gough was one of the few actors who appeared in all four films of the initial \"Batman\" film series.\nThe unammed mayor of Gotham City. He doesn't like Max Shreck's idea to build a nuclear power plant in Gotham City. His son is later kidnapped by the Red Triangle Circus Gang, only to be \"saved\" by The Penguin.\nA member of the Red Triangle Circus Gang and The Penguin's right-hand man. He carries an organ grinder as his main weapon. He survives all three attacks on Gotham City, but is captured and presumably interrogated by Batman during the Penguin's final attempt to take over Gotham City.\nSon of Max Shreck and his late wife. Apart from being the heir of Max's business, he is brave enough to do everything he can to defend his father, such as ordering him to flee as he helps other Gotham City residents to retain members of the Red Triangle Circus Gang.\nA Christmas-themed beauty queen and model of Gotham City. She is kidnapped by The Penguin and later falls to her death due the latter's guilt. Conaway described the character to \"Entertainment Weekly\" as \"to push an old lady down and try to fix her nail at the same time\".\nA member of the Red Triangle Circus Gang. He survives the first attack on Gotham City, but is killed during the second attack by one of his bombs when Batman throws him into a hole before the explosion.\nA member of the Red Triangle Circus Gang. She survives all three attacks on Gotham City, but she runs away along her poodle to escape from Batman during the third attack, abandoning her teammates.\nThe father of Oswald Cobblepot and husband of Esther Cobblepot. He and his wife abandoned their son by throwing him into Gotham City's park river after realizing that he could be a danger to society after he killed their cat. Burgess Meredith, the actor who played The Penguin in the classic Adam West's 1960s \"Batman\" TV series was originally asked to play Tucker, but he declined due his health problems which culminated with his death in 1997.\nThe mother of Oswald Cobblepot and wife of Tucker Cobblepot. She and her husband abandoned their son by throwing him into Gotham City's park river after realizing that he could be a danger to society after he killed their cat.\n\nAfter the success of \"Batman\", Warner Bros. was hoping for a sequel to start filming in May 1990 at Pinewood Studios. They spent $250,000 storing the sets from the first film. Tim Burton originally did not want to direct another film in the franchise. \"I will return if the sequel offers something new and exciting\", he said in 1989. \"Otherwise it's a most-dumbfounded idea.\" Burton decided to direct \"Edward Scissorhands\" for 20th Century Fox. Meanwhile, Sam Hamm from the previous film delivered the first two drafts of the script, while Bob Kane was brought back as a creative consultant. Hamm's script had Penguin and Catwoman going after hidden treasure.\n\nBurton was impressed with Daniel Waters' work on \"Heathers\"; Burton originally brought Waters aboard on a sequel to \"Beetlejuice\". Warner Bros. then granted Burton a large amount of creative control. Denise Di Novi and Burton became the film's producers. The first film's producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber became executive producers, joining Benjamin Melniker and Michael E. Uslan. Dissatisfied with the Hamm script, Burton commissioned a rewrite from Waters. Waters \"came up with a social satire that had an evil mogul backing a bid for the Mayor's office by the Penguin\", Waters reported. \"I wanted to show that the true villains of our world don't necessarily wear costumes.\" The subplot of Penguin running for Mayor came from the 1960s TV series episodes \"Hizzoner the Penguin\" and \"Dizzoner the Penguin\". Waters wrote a total of five drafts.\n\nOn the characterization of Catwoman, Waters explained \"Sam Hamm went back to the way comic books in general treat women, like fetishy sexual fantasy. I wanted to start off just at the lowest point in society, a very beaten down secretary.\" Harvey Dent appeared in early drafts of the script, but was deleted. His disfiguring appearance of Two-Face would have appeared in the climax when Catwoman kisses him with a taser to the face, which was replaced with Max Shreck. Waters quoted, \"Sam Hamm definitely planned that. I flirted with it, having Harvey start to come back and have one scene of him where he flips a coin and it's the good side of the coin, deciding not to do anything, so you had to wait for the next movie.\" In early scripts Max Shreck was the \"golden boy\" of the Cobblepot family, whereas Penguin was the deformed outsider. It turned out that Shreck would be the Penguin's long-lost brother. Max Shreck was also a reference to actor Max Schreck, known for his role as Count Orlok in \"Nosferatu\".\n\nBurton hired Wesley Strick to do an uncredited rewrite. Strick recalled, \"When I was hired to write \"Batman Returns\" (\"Batman II\" at the time), the big problem of the script was Penguin's lack of a 'master plan'.\" Warner Bros. presented Strick with warming, or freezing Gotham City, a plot point they would later use in \"Batman & Robin\". Strick gained inspiration from a Moses parallel that had Penguin killing the firstborn sons of Gotham. A similar notion was used when the Penguin's parents threw him into a river as a baby. Robin appeared in the script, but was deleted because Waters felt the film had too many characters. Waters called Robin \"the most worthless character in the world, especially with [Batman as] the loner of loners.\" Robin started out as a juvenile gang leader, who becomes an ally to Batman. Robin was later changed to a black teenage garage mechanic. Waters explained, \"He's wearing this old-fashioned garage mechanic uniform and it has an 'R' on it. He drives the Batmobile, which I notice they used in the third film!\" Marlon Wayans was cast, and signed for a sequel. The actor had attended a wardrobe fitting, but it was decided to save the character for a third installment.\n\nMichael Keaton returned after a significant increase in his salary to $10 million. Annette Bening was cast as Catwoman after Burton saw her performance in \"The Grifters\", but she dropped out due to pregnancy. Raquel Welch, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Madonna, Ellen Barkin, Cher, Bridget Fonda, Lorraine Bracco, Jennifer Beals and Susan Sarandon were then in competition for the role. Sean Young, who was originally chosen for Vicki Vale in the previous film, believed the role should have gone to her. Young visited production offices dressed in a homemade Catwoman costume, demanding an audition. Burton was unfamiliar with Michelle Pfeiffer's work, but was convinced to cast her after one meeting. Pfeiffer received a $3 million salary, $2 million more than Bening, and a percentage of the box office. The actress undertook kickboxing lessons for the role. Kathy Long served as Pfeiffer's body double. On Danny DeVito's casting, Waters explained, \"I kind of knew that DeVito was going to play The Penguin. We didn't really officially cast it, but for a short nasty little guy, it's a short list. I ended up writing the character for Danny DeVito.\"\n\nBurgess Meredith (who portrayed Penguin in the 60s TV series Batman) was cast for a little cameo as Tucker Cobblepot, Penguin's father, but illness prevented him from it and that role was taken by Paul Reubens.\n\nIn early 1991, two of Hollywood's largest sound stages (Stage 16 at Warner Bros. and Stage 12 at Universal Studios) were being prepared for the filming of \"Batman Returns\". Filming started in June 1991. Stage 16 held Gotham Plaza, based on Rockefeller Center. Universal's Stage 12 housed Penguin's underground lair. A half-a-million gallon tank filled with water was used. Burton wanted to make sure that the penguins felt comfortable. Eight other locations on the Warner Bros. lot were used; over 50% of their property was occupied by Gotham City sets.\n\nAnimal rights groups started protesting the film after finding out that penguins would have rockets strapped on their backs. Richard Hill, the curator of the penguins, explained that Warner Bros. was very helpful in making sure the penguins were comfortable. \"On the flight over the plane was refrigerated down to 45 degrees\", recalls Hill. \"In Hollywood, they were given a refrigerated trailer, their own swimming pool, half-a-ton of ice each day, and they had fresh fish delivered daily straight from the docks. Even though it was 100 degrees outside, the entire set was refrigerated down to 35 degrees.\" According to the American Humane Association's On-Set Oversight, The six Emperor penguins that act as pallbearers for the Penguin's body at the end of the film, were little people dressed as Emperor penguins.\n\nThe streets of Gotham City use the old Brownstone Street and Hennessy Street on the Warners' backlot.\n\nWarner Bros. devoted a large amount of secrecy for \"Batman Returns\". The art department was required to keep their office blinds pulled down. Cast and crew had to have photo ID badges with the movie's fake working title \"Dictel\" to go anywhere near the sets. Kevin Costner was refused a chance to visit the set. An entertainment magazine leaked the first photos of Danny DeVito as the Penguin; in response Warner Bros. employed a private investigator to track down the accomplice. $65 million was spent during the production of \"Batman Returns\", while $15 million was used for marketing, coming to a total cost of $80 million. The final shot of Catwoman looking at the Bat-Signal was completed during post-production and was not part of the shooting script. After \"Batman Returns\" was completed Warner Bros. felt it was best for Catwoman to survive, saving more characterizations in a future installment. Pfeiffer was unavailable and a body double was chosen.\n\nBo Welch, Burton's collaborator on \"Beetlejuice\" and \"Edward Scissorhands\", replaced Anton Furst as production designer, since Furst was unable to return for the sequel due to contractual obligations. Welch blended \"Fascist architecture with World's fair architecture\" for Gotham City. He also studied Russian architecture and German Expressionism. An iron maiden was used for Bruce Wayne's entry into the Batcave. Stan Winston, who worked with Burton on \"Edward Scissorhands\", designed Danny DeVito's prosthetic makeup, which took two hours to apply. DeVito had to put a combination of mouthwash and red/green food coloring in his mouth \"to create a grotesque texture of some weird ooze.\"\nMore than 60 Catsuits were designed in the six-month shoot at $1,000 each. The Batsuit was updated, which was made out of a thinner, slightly more flexible foam rubber material than the suit from \"Batman\". DeVito was uncomfortable with his costume, but this made it easy for him to get into character. J. P. Morgan's wardrobe was used for inspiration on Max Shreck's costume design.\n\nThe bats were entirely composed of computer-generated imagery since it was decided directing real bats on set would be problematic. The Penguin's \"bird army\" was a combination of CGI, robotic creatures, men in suits and even real penguins. Robotic penguin puppets were commissioned by Stan Winston. In total 30 African penguins and 12 king penguins were used. A miniature effect was used for the exteriors of the Cobblepot Mansion in the opening scene and for Wayne Manor. The same method was used for the Bat Ski-boat and the exterior shots of the Gotham Zoo.\n\nDanny Elfman had great enthusiasm for returning because \"I didn't have to prove myself from the first film. I remember Jon Peters was very skeptical at first to hire me.\" Elfman's work schedule was 12 hours a day, 7 days a week. \"When completing this movie I realized it was something of a film score and an opera. It was 95 minutes long, twice the amount of the average film score.\" Burton allowed Elfman to be more artistic with the sequel score, such as the \"scraping\" on violins for the cat themes. Under the pressure of finishing the score, however, the relationship between the two strained, which — along with further \"creative differences\" on \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" — led Burton to use Howard Shore to score his next film \"Ed Wood\". The musician co-orchestrated \"Face to Face\", which was written and performed by Siouxsie and the Banshees. The song can be heard in one scene during the film and during the end credits.\n\n\"Batman Returns\" was released in America on June 19, 1992, earning $45.69 million in 2,644 theaters on its opening weekend. This was the highest opening weekend in 1992 and the highest opening weekend of any film up to that point. The film went on to gross $162.83 million in North America, and $104 million in foreign countries, coming to a worldwide total of $266.83 million. \"Batman Returns\" was the third highest-grossing film in America of 1992, and sixth highest in worldwide totals.\n\n\"Batman Returns\" was criticized by some for being too dark and violent, but nonetheless received positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 80% based on 71 reviews, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Director Tim Burton's dark, brooding atmosphere, Michael Keaton's work as the tormented hero, and the flawless casting of Danny DeVito as The Penguin and Christopher Walken as, well, Christopher Walken make the sequel better than the first.\" Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\nJanet Maslin in \"The New York Times\" thought that \"Mr. Burton creates a wicked world of misfits, all of them rendered with the mixture of horror, sympathy and playfulness that has become this director's hallmark.\" She described Michael Keaton as showing \"appropriate earnestness\", Danny DeVito as \"conveying verve\", Christopher Walken as \"wonderfully debonair\", Michelle Pfeiffer as \"captivating... fierce, seductive\", Bo Welch's production design as \"dazzling\", Stefan Czapsky's cinematography as \"crisp\", and Daniel Waters's screenplay as \"sharp.\"\n\nPeter Travers in \"Rolling Stone\" wrote: \"Burton uses the summer's most explosively entertaining movie to lead us back into the liberating darkness of dreams.\" He praised the performances: \"Pfeiffer gives this feminist avenger a tough core of intelligence and wit; she's a classic dazzler... Michael Keaton's manic-depressive hero remains a remarkably rich creation. And Danny DeVito's mutant Penguin—a balloon-bellied \"Richard III\" with a kingdom of sewer freaks—is as hilariously warped as Jack Nicholson's Joker and even quicker with the quips.\"\n\nDesson Howe in \"The Washington Post\" wrote: \"Director Burton not only re-creates his one-of-a-kind atmosphere, he one-ups it, even two-ups it. He's best at evoking the psycho-murky worlds in which his characters reside. The Penguin holds court in a penguin-crowded, \"Phantom of the Opera\"-like sewer home. Keaton hides in a castlelike mansion, which perfectly mirrors its owner's inner remoteness. Comic strip purists will probably never be happy with a \"Batman\" movie. But \"Returns\" comes closer than ever to Bob Kane's dark, original strip, which began in 1939.\" He described Walken as \"engaging\", DeVito as \"exquisite\" and Pfeiffer as \"deliciously purry.\"\n\nTodd McCarthy in \"Variety\" wrote that \"the real accomplishment of the film lies in the amazing physical realization of an imaginative universe. Where Burton's ideas end and those of his collaborators begin is impossible to know, but the result is a seamless, utterly consistent universe full of nasty notions about societal deterioration, greed and other base impulses.\" He praised the contributions of Stan Winston, Danny Elfman, Bo Welch and cinematographer Stefan Czapsky, and in terms of performances, opined that \"the deck is stacked entirely in favor of the villains\", calling DeVito \"fascinating\" and Pfeiffer \"very tasty.\"\n\nConversely, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film two stars out of four, writing: \"I give the movie a negative review, and yet I don't think it's a bad movie; it's more misguided, made with great creativity, but denying us what we more or less deserve from a \"Batman\" story. No matter how hard you try, superheroes and film noir don't go together; the very essence of noir is that there are no more heroes.\" He compared the Penguin negatively with the Joker of the first film, writing that \"the Penguin is a curiously meager and depressing creature; I pitied him, but did not fear him or find him funny. The genius of Danny DeVito is all but swallowed up in the paraphernalia of the role.\" Jonathan Rosenbaum called DeVito \"a pale substitute for Jack Nicholson from the first film\" and felt that \"there's no suspense in \"Batman Returns\" whatsoever\". Batman comic book writer/artist Matt Wagner was quoted as saying: \"I hated how \"Batman Returns\" made Batman little more than just another costumed creep, little better than the villains he's pursuing. Additionally, Burton is so blatantly not an action director. That aspect of both his films just sucked.\" Ty Burr in \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave the film a B-; he wrote that \"Burton still hasn't figured out how to tell a coherent story: He's more interested in fashioning pretty beads than in putting them on a string... Yet for all the wintry weirdness, there's more going on under the surface of this movie than in the original. No wonder some people felt burned by \"Batman Returns\": Tim Burton just may have created the first blockbuster art film.\"\n\nA \"parental backlash\" criticized \"Batman Returns\" with violence and sexual references that were inappropriate for children despite being rated PG-13. McDonald's shut down their Happy Meal promotion for the film. Burton responded, \"I like \"Batman Returns\" better than the first one. There was this big backlash that it was too dark, but I found this movie much less dark.\"\n\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nIt was part of Empire's 500 Greatest Films in 2008 at number 401.\n\n\"Batman Returns\" would be the last film in the Warner Bros. \"Batman\" film series that featured Burton and Michael Keaton as director and leading actor. With \"Batman Forever\", Warner Bros. decided to go in a \"lighter\" direction to be more mainstream in the process of a family film. Burton had no interest in returning to direct a sequel, but was credited as producer. With Warner Bros. moving on development for \"Batman Forever\" in June 1993, a \"Catwoman\" spin-off was announced. Michelle Pfeiffer was to reprise her role, with the character not to appear in \"Forever\" because of her own spin-off.\n\nBurton became attached as director, while producer Denise Di Novi and writer Daniel Waters also returned. In January 1994, Burton was unsure of his plans to direct \"Catwoman\" or an adaptation of \"The Fall of the House of Usher\". On June 6, 1995, Waters turned in his \"Catwoman\" script to Warner Bros., the same day \"Batman Forever\" was released. Burton was still being courted to direct. Waters joked, \"Turning it in the day \"Batman Forever\" opened may not have been my best logistical move, in that it's the celebration of the fun-for-the-whole-family Batman. \"Catwoman\" is definitely not a fun-for-the-whole-family script.\" In an August 1995 interview, Pfeiffer re-iterated her interest in the spin-off, but explained her priorities would be challenged as a mother and commitments to other projects. The film labored in development hell for years, with Pfeiffer replaced by Ashley Judd. The film ended up becoming the critically panned \"Catwoman\" (2004), starring Halle Berry.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4729", "title": "Batman &amp; Robin (film)", "text": "Batman &amp; Robin (film)\n\nBatman & Robin is a 1997 American superhero film based on the DC Comics characters Batman and Robin. It is the fourth and final installment of Warner Bros.' initial \"Batman\" film series. The film was directed by Joel Schumacher and written by Akiva Goldsman. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Alicia Silverstone, and Uma Thurman. \"Batman & Robin\" tells the story of Batman and Robin as they attempt to prevent Mr. Freeze and Poison Ivy from freezing all mankind to death and repopulating the earth with mutant plants, while at the same time struggling to keep their partnership together. It is also to date the only live-action film appearance of Batgirl, who helps the title characters fight the villains.\n\nWarner Bros. fast-tracked development for \"Batman & Robin\" following the box office success of the previous film, \"Batman Forever\". Schumacher and Goldsman conceived the storyline during pre-production on \"A Time to Kill\", while Val Kilmer decided not to reprise the role over scheduling conflicts with \"The Saint\". Schumacher had a strong interest in casting William Baldwin in Kilmer's place before George Clooney won the role. Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule.\n\n\"Batman & Robin\" premiered in Los Angeles on June 12, 1997 and went into general release on June 20, 1997. While it performed modestly at the box office, making $238.2 million worldwide against a production budget of $125 million, the film was a critical failure and is often considered to be one of the worst films of all time. It is also the lowest grossing live-action Batman movie to date. Due to the film's negative reception, Warner Bros. cancelled a sequel, \"Batman Unchained\", and rebooted the film series with \"Batman Begins\" in 2005. One of the songs recorded for the film, \"The End Is the Beginning Is the End\" by The Smashing Pumpkins, won a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 40th Grammy Awards.\n\nIn Gotham, one year after the defeat of Two-Face and the Riddler, Batman and Robin attempt to thwart Mr. Freeze from robbing diamonds from the natural history museum, but he steals one and flees. Mr. Freeze was originally Dr. Victor Fries, a doctor working to develop a cure for MacGregor's syndrome to heal his terminally ill wife. Fries was forced to wear a cryogenic suit powered by diamonds after becoming unable to live at normal temperatures following a lab accident. \n\nAt a Wayne Enterprises lab in South America, the botanist Dr. Pamela Isley is working under the deranged Dr. Jason Woodrue, experimenting with the Venom drug. She witnesses Woodrue use the formula to turn the violent, but diminutive, convicted serial murderer Antonio Diego into a hulking monstrosity dubbed \"Bane\". Woodrue and Isley argue over the use of the drug which ends when Woodrue attempts to kill her by overturning a shelf of various toxins. Despite Woodrue's efforts, she is resurrected, transforming into the beautiful and seductive Poison Ivy before exacting revenge; she kills Woodrue with her poisonous kiss. She finds that Wayne Enterprises funded Woodrue, thus she appropriates Bane as a muscle-bound thug, taking him with her to Gotham City. Meanwhile, Alfred Pennyworth's niece, Barbara Wilson, makes a surprise visit and is invited by Bruce Wayne to stay at Wayne Manor until she goes back to school. \n\nWayne Enterprises presents a new telescope at a press conference interrupted by Isley. She proposes a project that could help the environment, but Bruce declines her offer, which would kill millions of people. That night, a charity event is held by Wayne Enterprises with special guests, Batman and Robin, and she decides to use her abilities to seduce them. Freeze crashes the party and steals a diamond from the event. Although he is captured by Batman and detained in Arkham Asylum, he eventually escapes with the help of Ivy and Bane. Meanwhile, Dick discovers that Barbara has participated in drag races to raise money for Alfred, who is dying of MacGregor's syndrome. \n\nBatman and Robin begin to have crime fighting relationship problems because of Ivy's seductive ability with Robin, but Bruce convinces Dick to trust him. Ivy is then able to contact Robin once more; she kisses him but fails to kill him due to Robin wearing rubber lips. Meanwhile, Barbara discovers the Batcave, where an AI version of Alfred reveals he has made Barbara her own suit. Barbara dons the suit and becomes Batgirl. Robin and later on Batman become trapped, but are rescued by Batgirl, who reveals her identity.\n\nBatman, Robin and Batgirl decide to go after Freeze together. By the time they get to the observatory where Freeze and Bane are, Gotham is completely frozen. Batgirl and Robin are attacked by Bane. They eventually defeat him by kicking apart his venom tubes, stopping the flow of venom to his body. Bane collapses before transforming back to his original diminutive size of Antonio Diego and is left helpless on the ground. Meanwhile Batman and Freeze begin to fight each other, with Batman defeating Freeze. Batgirl and Robin manage to unfreeze Gotham; and Batman shows Freeze a recording of Ivy during her fight with Batgirl. Freeze learns that Ivy has betrayed him over the death of wife. Ivy blamed Batman for Nora's death, but she informs Batgirl that it was her idea. Freeze is angered by the betrayal and is informed by Batman that his wife is not dead; she is restored in cryogenic slumber and has been moved to Arkham waiting for him to finish his research. Batman proceeds to ask Freeze for the cure Freeze has created for the first stage of MacGregor's Syndrome to administer to Alfred. Freeze atones for his misunderstanding by giving him medicine he had developed. Ivy is detained in Arkham alongside Freeze, who promises to torment Ivy during their sentence. After Alfred is cured, everyone agrees to let Barbara stay at Wayne Manor.\n\n\nWith the box office success of \"Batman Forever\" in June 1995, Warner Bros. immediately commissioned a sequel. They hired director Joel Schumacher and writer Akiva Goldsman to reprise their duties the following August, and decided it was best to fast track production for a June 1997 target release date, which is a break from the usual 3-year gap between films. Schumacher wanted to homage both the broad camp style of the 1960s television series and the work of Dick Sprang. The storyline of \"Batman & Robin\" was conceived by Schumacher and Goldsman during pre-production on \"A Time to Kill\". Portions of Mr. Freeze's back-story were based on the \"\" episode \"\", written by Paul Dini.\n\nWhile Chris O'Donnell reprises the role of Robin, Val Kilmer decided not to reprise the role of Batman from \"Batman Forever\". Schumacher admitted he had difficulty working with Kilmer on \"Forever\". \"He sort of quit,\" Schumacher said, \"and we sort of fired him.\" Kilmer said he was not aware of the fast track production and was already committed to \"The Saint\" (1997). Schumacher originally had a strong interest in casting William Baldwin in Kilmer's place, but George Clooney was cast instead. Schumacher believed Clooney could provide a lighter interpretation of the character than Michael Keaton (in \"Batman\" and \"Batman Returns\") and Kilmer. The shooting schedule allowed Clooney to simultaneously work on \"ER\" without any scheduling conflicts.\n\nPatrick Stewart was considered for the role of Mr. Freeze, before the script was rewritten to accommodate Arnold Schwarzenegger's casting. Schumacher decided that Mr. Freeze must be \"big and strong like he was chiseled out of a glacier\". Schwarzenegger was paid a $25 million salary for the role. His prosthetic makeup and wardrobe took six hours to apply each day. Thurman took the role of Poison Ivy because she liked the femme fatale characterization of the character. Alicia Silverstone was the only choice for the role of Batgirl. \n\nAccording to Schumacher, during the scene in which the costumes of the Riddler and Two-Face are seen, he originally planned to put Poison Ivy and Mr. Freeze escaping from Arkham Asylum while many other villains saw them from their cells. The scene, however, didn't make it in the final film.\n\nThe original start date was August 1996, but principal photography did not begin until September 12, 1996. \"Batman & Robin\" finished filming in late January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule. The film was mostly shot at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California.\n\nWhen comparing work on \"Batman Forever\", Chris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, explained, \"It just felt like everything got a little soft the second time. On \"Batman Forever\", I felt like I was making a movie. The second time, I felt like I was making a kid's toy commercial.\" He also complained of the Robin costume, saying it was more involved and uncomfortable than the one he wore in \"Batman Forever\", with a glued-on mask which caused sweat to pool on his face. According to John Glover, who played Dr. Jason Woodrue, \"Joel [Schumacher] would sit on a crane with a megaphone and yell before each take, 'Remember, everyone, this is a cartoon'. It was hard to act because that kind of set the tone for the film.\" Production designer Barbara Ling admitted her influences for the Gotham City design came from \"neon-ridden Tokyo and the Machine Age. Gotham is like a World's Fair on ecstasy.\" Rhythm and Hues and Pacific Data Images created the visual effects sequences, with John Dykstra and Andrew Adamson credited as the visual effects supervisors.\n\nAccording to \"Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight Part 6: Batman Unbound\", Chris O'Donnell revealed that despite hanging out with Arnold Schwarzenegger a lot off set and during promotion for the film, they never worked a single day together. This was achieved with stand ins when one of the actors wasn't available.\n\nStunt coordinator Alex Field taught Alicia Silverstone to ride a motorcycle so that she could play Batgirl.\n\nLike \"Batman Forever\", the original score for the film was written by Elliot Goldenthal. The soundtrack featured a variety of genres by various bands and performers, showcasing alternative rock on the lead single \"The End Is the Beginning Is the End\" by The Smashing Pumpkins, on the Goo Goo Dolls' contribution, \"Lazy Eye\" and with R.E.M.'s song \"Revolution\". R&B singer R. Kelly also wrote \"Gotham City\" for the soundtrack, which became the other song featured in the end credits, as well as one of the singles, reaching the top 10 in the United States and in the UK. Eric Benét and Meshell Ndegeocello also contributed R&B songs. Also included was the top 5 second single, \"Look into My Eyes\" by the hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony. Other songs featured included electronic dance elements, including those by Moloko and Arkana. The soundtrack was released on May 27, 1997, a month before the film.\n\nThe \"Batman & Robin\" film trailer debuted on the February 19, 1997 episode of \"Entertainment Tonight\". Warner Bros. spent $15 million to market and promote the film, in addition to its $125 million production budget. The studio also brought in toy companies to be involved with pre-production, including the design of concept art and character illustrations. Director Joel Schumacher criticized Warner Bros.'s strategy for \"Batman & Robin\" as being overtly toyetic. \n\nVarious Six Flags parks (Six Flags Great Adventure, Six Flags Over Texas, and Six Flags St. Louis) all debuted coasters themed to the film (all of which have since been closed or re-themed to \"\"). Taco Bell featured a promotional campaign including collectible cups and a contest with a replica of the film's Batmobile as a grand prize. A junior novelization of the screenplay, written by Alan Grant, was published along with the release of the film in 1997.\n\n\"Batman & Robin\" was released on June 20, 1997 in North America, earning $42,872,605 in its opening weekend, making it the third-highest opening weekend of 1997. The film declined by 63% in its second week. \"Batman & Robin\" faced early competition with \"Face/Off\" and \"Hercules\". Schumacher blamed it on yellow journalism started by Harry Knowles of Ain't It Cool News and other film websites such as Dark Horizons. The film went on to gross $107.3 million in North America and $130.9 million internationally, coming to a worldwide total of $238.2 million. Warner Bros. acknowledged \"Batman & Robin\"s shortcomings in the domestic market but pointed out success overseas.\n\nThe review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 10% based on 86 reviews, with an average rating of 3.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Joel Schumacher's tongue-in-cheek attitude hits an unbearable limit in \"Batman & Robin\", resulting in a frantic and mindless movie that's too jokey to care much for.\" On Metacritic, the film has an average score of 28 out of 100, based on 21 critics, signifying \"generally unfavorable reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"C+\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\nSchumacher and producer Peter MacGregor-Scott blamed the negative reception of \"Batman & Robin\" on Warner Bros.' decision to fast track production. \"There was a lot of pressure from Warner Bros. to make \"Batman & Robin\" more family-friendly,\" Schumacher explained. \"We decided to do a less depressing \"Batman\" movie and less torture and more heroic. I know I have been criticized a lot for this, but I didn't see the harm in that approach at all.\" Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" criticized the toyetic approach and Mr. Freeze's one-liner jokes in his two-star review of the film. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" believed the film \"killed\" the \"Batman\" film series, and felt \"Batman & Robin\" depended too much on visual effects. Desson Thomson of \"The Washington Post\" largely disapproved of Schumacher's direction and Akiva Goldsman's script. Mick LaSalle, writing in the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", said, \"George Clooney is the big zero of the film, and should go down in history as the George Lazenby of the series.\" However, Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" gave a positive review. She praised Uma Thurman's acting, as well as the production and costume design.\n\n\"Batman & Robin\" was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film, as well as Best Make-up and Best Costume, but won none. Alicia Silverstone won the Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress. Other nominations at the Razzie Awards included Schumacher (Worst Director), George Clooney and Chris O'Donnell (Worst Screen Couple), Akiva Goldsman (Worst Screenplay), both Chris O'Donnell and Arnold Schwarzenegger (Worst Supporting Actor), Uma Thurman (Worst Supporting Actress), as well as Billy Corgan (Worst Song for \"The End Is the Beginning Is the End\"). \"Batman & Robin\" also received nominations for Worst Picture, Worst Remake or Sequel and Worst Reckless Disregard for Human Life and Public Property. Ultimately, out of 11 nominations, \"Batman & Robin\" garnered only one Razzie Award.\n\nSome observers thought Schumacher, a gay man, added possible homoerotic innuendo in the storyline. James Berardinelli questioned the \"random amount \"[sic]\" of rubber nipples and camera angle close-ups of the Dynamic Duo's butts and Bat-crotches.\" Similar to \"Batman Forever\", this primarily included the decision to add nipples and enlarged codpieces to Batman and Robin suits. Schumacher stated, \"I had no idea that putting nipples on the Batsuit and Robin suit were going to spark international headlines. The bodies of the suits come from ancient Greek statues, which display perfect bodies. They are anatomically correct.\" Chris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, felt \"it wasn't so much the nipples that bothered me. It was the codpiece. The press obviously played it up and made it a big deal, especially with Joel directing. I didn't think twice about the controversy, but going back and looking and seeing some of the pictures, it was very unusual.\" George Clooney joked, \"Joel Schumacher told me we never made another \"Batman\" film because Batman was gay\". Clooney himself has spoken critically of the film, saying, \"I think we might have killed the franchise\", and called it \"a waste of money\".\n\nDuring the filming of \"Batman & Robin\", Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies, prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to return as director for a fifth film. However, writer Akiva Goldsman turned down an offer to write the script. In late 1996, Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth \"Batman\" film. A projected mid-1999 release date was announced. Titled \"Batman Unchained\", Protosevich's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain. Through the use of his fear toxin, he resurrects the Joker as a hallucination in Batman's mind. Harley Quinn appeared as a supporting character, written as the Joker's daughter. George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, and Alicia Silverstone were set to reprise the roles of Batman, Robin, and Batgirl. It was also hoped that Jack Nicholson would reprise the role of the Joker. However, following the poor critical reception of \"Batman & Robin\", Clooney vowed never to reprise his role.\n\nWarner Bros. decided to consider a live-action \"Batman Beyond\" film and an adaptation of Frank Miller's \"\". Warner would then produce whichever idea suited them the most. Schumacher felt he \"owe[d] the Batman culture a real \"Batman\" movie. I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight.\" He approached Warner Bros. about doing \"Batman: Year One\" in mid-1998, but they were more interested in hiring Darren Aronofsky. Aronofsky and Miller developed a \"Year One\" script with Aronofsky to direct, but it was ultimately canceled. Christopher Nolan was eventually hired to helm the next \"Batman\" film in January 2003, resulting in the rebooted \"Batman Begins\" (2005).\n\nIn \"Legends of the Dark Knight\", an episode of \"The New Batman Adventures\", three teenagers discuss their ideas about what Batman is really like. They briefly meet a youth called Joel whose idea of Batman reflects characterizations and costumes portrayed within Schumacher's \"Batman and Robin\". The teens treat Joel's ideas with utter disdain. In \"Watchmen\", director Zack Snyder and comic book artist Dave Gibbons chose to parody the molded muscle and nipple Batsuit design from \"Batman & Robin\" for the Ozymandias costume. The film is referenced in the \"\" episode \"Legends of the Dark Mite!\", when Bat-Mite briefly uses his powers to transform Batman's costume into the same suit shown in the Schumacher \"Batman\" films, before declaring it \"Too icky\". The Batman from \"Batman & Robin\" later appeared as part of an army of Batmen gathered from across the Multiverse in \"Night of the Batmen!\", complete with the blue rubber Batsuit. Additionally, there were worries within Warner Bros. surrounding the negative critical reaction to \"Batman & Robin\" and how that may come to harm the success of the subsequent direct-to-video animated film \"\", which was originally planned for release at around the same time as \"Batman & Robin\" but was subsequently delayed. However, \"SubZero\" received a far stronger positive response from critics than \"Batman & Robin\", with Mr. Freeze's role within it being seen in a much more positive light, returning his popularity as a \"Batman\" villain to a level comparable to that reached by him within the two Emmy-winning episodes the character featured in of \"\".\n\n"}
{"id": "4730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4730", "title": "Batman Forever", "text": "Batman Forever\n\nBatman Forever is a 1995 American superhero film directed by Joel Schumacher and produced by Tim Burton, based on the DC Comics character Batman. It is the third installment of the , with Val Kilmer replacing Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman. The film stars Chris O'Donnell, Nicole Kidman, Tommy Lee Jones and Jim Carrey. The plot focuses on Batman trying to stop Two-Face (Jones) and the Riddler (Carrey) in their villainous scheme to extract confidential information from all the minds in Gotham City and use it to learn Batman's identity and bring the city under their control. He gains allegiance from a love interest—psychiatrist Dr. Chase Meridian (Kidman) and a young, orphaned circus acrobat named Dick Grayson (O'Donnell), who becomes his sidekick Robin.\n\n\"Batman Forever\"s tone is significantly different from the previous installments, becoming more family-friendly since Warner Bros. believed that the previous \"Batman\" film, \"Batman Returns\" (1992), failed to outgross its predecessor due to parent complaints about the film's violence and dark overtones. Schumacher eschewed the dark, dystopian atmosphere of Burton's films by drawing inspiration from the Batman comic book of the Dick Sprang era, as well as the 1960s television series. Keaton chose not to reprise the role due to Burton stepping down as director. William Baldwin and Ethan Hawke were initially considered for Keaton's replacement before Kilmer joined the cast. Coincidentally, Baldwin later starred as Batman in the DC Animated film, \"\".\n\nThe film was released on June 16, 1995, receiving mixed reviews, but was a financial success. \"Batman Forever\" grossed over $336 million worldwide and became the sixth-highest-grossing film worldwide of 1995.\n\nIn Gotham City, three years after defeating the Penguin, the crime fighter Batman stops a hostage situation caused by a criminal known as Two-Face, the alter ego of the former district attorney Harvey Dent, but Two-Face escapes and remains at large. Edward Nygma, a researcher at Wayne Enterprises who idolizes Bruce Wayne, has developed a device that can beam television into a person's brain. Bruce offers to let Nygma come up with schematics for the device and set up a meeting with his assistant. However, after Nygma demands an answer from him immediately, Bruce rejects the invention, believing it to be too close to mind manipulation. After killing his supervisor Fred Stickley, Nygma resigns and seeks retaliation against Bruce for rejecting his invention and begins to send him riddles. A news report reveals how Harvey Dent became Two-Face: when he was prosecuting a mob boss named Sal Maroni, Maroni threw acid on Dent's face, disfiguring half of it. Batman tried to save him, but failed. After the incident, Dent seeks to kill Batman for failing to save him. Bruce meets Chase Meridian, a psychiatrist who is obsessed with Batman, and invites her to come with him to a circus event. After a performance from the circus performers, The Flying Graysons, Two-Face arrives and threatens to blow up the circus unless Batman comes forward and surrenders his life to him. The Flying Graysons attempt to stop Two-Face, but they get killed by as a result. However, Dick Grayson, the youngest member, survives as he climbs to the roof and throws Two-Face's bomb into a river.\n\nBruce invites the orphaned Dick to stay at Wayne Manor. Dick, still troubled by the murder of his family, intends to kill Two-Face and avenge his family. When he discovers that Bruce is Batman, he demands that Bruce help him find Two-Face so that he can kill him, but Bruce refuses. Meanwhile, Nygma turns himself into a criminal called the Riddler and forms an alliance with Two-Face. The two steal capital in order to mass-produce Nygma's brainwave device. At Nygma's business party, Nygma discovers Bruce's alter ego using the brainwave device. Two-Face arrives and crashes the party. He nearly kills Batman, but Dick manages to save him. Meanwhile, Chase has fallen in love with Bruce, which surpasses her obsession with Batman, but she soon discovers that they are one and the same. Bruce decides to stop being Batman in order to have a normal life with Chase and to prevent Dick from murdering Two-Face. Dick angrily runs away while Bruce and Chase have dinner together in the manor. The Riddler and Two-Face arrive and attack Wayne Manor. The Riddler destroys the Batcave and kidnaps Chase, while leaving an injured Bruce another riddle.\n\nUsing the riddles, Bruce and his butler, Alfred, find out the Riddler's secret identity. Dick returns and becomes Batman's sidekick, Robin. Batman and Robin head to Riddler and Two-Face's lair, Claw Island, where they are separated. Robin encounters Two-Face and nearly kills him. Realizing that he does not have it in him to murder, Robin spares him. Two-Face gets the upper hand and captures Robin. Batman arrives at the lair, where Robin and Chase are held as hostages. The Riddler gives Batman a chance to save only one hostage. But instead, Batman destroys the Riddler's brainwave collecting device, causing the Riddler to suffer a mental breakdown. Batman manages to save Robin and Chase. Two-Face corners the trio and determines their fate with the flip of a coin, but Batman throws a handful of identical coins in the air, causing Two-Face to stumble and fall to his death. The Riddler is taken to Arkham Asylum and imprisoned, but he claims he knows who Batman is. Chase is asked to consult on the case, but Nygma says that he himself is Batman, due to his damaged memories. Chase meets Bruce outside and tells him that his secret is safe before parting ways. Bruce resumes his crusade as Batman with Robin as his partner to protect Gotham from crime.\n\n\n\"Batman Returns\" was released in 1992 with financial success and generally favorable reviews from critics, but Warner Bros. was disappointed with its box office run, having made $150 million less than the first film. Director Tim Burton was asked to restrict himself to the role of producer, with approval of Joel Schumacher as director. and the husband and wife screenwriting couple Lee and Janet Scott-Batchler, who agreed with him that \"the key element to Batman is his duality. And it's not just that Batman is Bruce Wayne\". Their original script introduced a psychotic Riddler with a pet rat accompanying him. The story elements and much of the dialogue still remained in the finished film, though Schumacher felt it could be \"lighte[ne]d down\". Schumacher claims he originally had in mind an adaptation of Frank Miller's \"\". Warner Bros. rejected the idea as they wanted a sequel, not a prequel, though Schumacher was able to include very brief events in Bruce Wayne's childhood with some events of the comic \"The Dark Knight Returns\". Akiva Goldsman, who worked with Schumacher on \"The Client\", was brought in to rewrite the script. Burton, who was more interested in directing \"Ed Wood\", later reflected he was taken aback by some of the focus group meetings for \"Batman Forever\", a title which he hated. Producer Peter MacGregor-Scott represented the studio's aim in making a film for the MTV Generation with full merchandising appeal.\n\nProduction went on fast track with Rene Russo cast as Dr. Chase Meridian but Michael Keaton decided not to reprise Batman because he did not like the new direction the film series was heading in. Keaton also wanted to pursue \"more interesting roles\", turning down $15 million. A decision was made to go with a younger actor for Bruce Wayne, and an offer was made to Ethan Hawke, who turned it down. Schumacher had seen Val Kilmer in \"Tombstone\", but was also interested in Daniel Day-Lewis, Ralph Fiennes, William Baldwin and Johnny Depp. Kilmer signed on without reading the script or knowing who the new director was.\n\nWith Kilmer's casting, Warner Bros. dropped Rene Russo as Chase Meridian. Robin Wright, Jeanne Tripplehorn and Linda Hamilton were all being considered the role was recast with Nicole Kidman. Billy Dee Williams took on the role of Harvey Dent in \"Batman\" on the possibility of portraying Two-Face in a sequel, but Schumacher cast Tommy Lee Jones in the role, after having worked with him on \"The Client\". Jones was reluctant to accept the role, but did so after his son's insistence. Robin Williams was in discussions to be the Riddler at one point. In a 2003 interview, Schumacher stated Michael Jackson lobbied hard for the role, but was turned down before Jim Carrey was cast. Robin appeared in the shooting script of \"Batman Returns\" but was deleted due to too many characters. Marlon Wayans had been cast in the role, and signed for a potential sequel. It was decided to replace Wayans with a white actor. Leonardo DiCaprio was considered, but decided not to go the role after a meeting with Schumacher. Chris O'Donnell was cast and Mitchell Gaylord served as his stunt double. Schumacher attempted to create a cameo role for Bono as his MacPhisto character, but both came to agree it was not suitable for the film.\n\nFilming started in September 1994. Schumacher hired Barbara Ling for production design, claiming that the film needed a \"force\" and good design. Ling could \"advance on it\". Schumacher wanted a design that was not to be in any way connected to the previous films, and instead was to be inspired by the images from the \"Batman\" comic books seen in the 1940s/early 1950s and taken from that of New York City architecture in the 1930s, with a combination of modern Tokyo. He also wanted a \"city with personality\", with more statues, as well as various amounts of neon.\n\nSchumacher had problems filming with Kilmer, whom he described as \"childish and impossible\", reporting that he fought with various crewmen, and refused to speak to Schumacher during two weeks after the director told him to stop behaving in a rude way. Schumacher also mentioned Tommy Lee Jones as a source of trouble: \"Jim Carrey was a gentleman, and Tommy Lee was threatened by him. I'm tired of defending overpaid, overprivileged actors. I pray I don't work with them again.\" Carrey later acknowledged Jones was not friendly to him, telling him once off-set during the production, \"I hate you. I really don't like you ... I cannot sanction your buffoonery.\"\n\nRick Baker designed the prosthetic makeup. John Dykstra, Andrew Adamson and Jim Rygiel served as visual effects supervisors, with Pacific Data Images also contributing to visual effects work. PDI provided a computer-generated Batman for complicated stunts. For the costume design, producer Peter MacGregor-Scott claimed that 146 workers were at one point working together. Batman's costume was redesigned along the lines of a more \"MTV organic, and edgier feel\" to the suit. Sound editing and mixing was supervised by Bruce Stambler and John Levesque, which included trips to caves to record bat sounds. A new Batmobile was designed for \"Batman Forever\", with two cars being constructed, one for stunt purposes and one for close-ups. Swiss surrealist painter H.R. Giger provided his version for the Batmobile but it was considered too sinister for the film.\n\nElliot Goldenthal was hired by Schumacher to compose the film score before the screenplay was written. In discussions with Schumacher, the director wanted Goldenthal to avoid taking inspiration from Danny Elfman, and requested an original composition. The film's promotional teaser trailer used the main title theme from Elfman's score of 1989's \"Batman\".\n\nThe soundtrack was commercially successful, selling almost as many copies as Prince's soundtrack to the 1989 \"Batman\" film. Only five of the songs on the soundtrack are actually featured in the movie. Hit singles from the soundtrack include \"Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me\" by U2 and \"Kiss from a Rose\" by Seal, both of which were nominated for MTV Movie Awards. \"Kiss from a Rose\" (whose video was also directed by Joel Schumacher) reached No. 1 in the U.S. charts as well. The soundtrack itself, featuring additional songs by The Flaming Lips, Brandy (both songs also included in the film), Method Man, Nick Cave, Michael Hutchence (of INXS), PJ Harvey, and Massive Attack, was an attempt to (in producer Peter MacGregor-Scott's words) make the film more \"pop\".\n\n\"Batman Forever\" went through a few major edits before its release. Originally darker than the final product, the movie's original length was closer to 2 hours and 40 minutes according to director Joel Schumacher. There was talk of an extended cut being released to DVD for the film's 10th anniversary in 2005. While all four previous \"Batman\" films were given special edition DVD releases on the same day as the \"Batman Begins\" DVD release, none of them were given extended cuts, although some of the following scenes were in a deleted scenes section in the special features.\n\nThere was an undercurrent theme involving Bruce having repressed memories of an aspect of his parents' death that he hadn't faced which was finding his father's diary on the night of his parents' wake and reading that Bruce insisted his parents go to the theater so he could watch one of the shows, meaning the reason he became Batman was out of the guilt that he killed them.\n\nMany scenes were filmed but deleted from the film, other scenes had footage removed. These included:\n\n\n\"Batman Forever\" opened in 2,842 theaters in the United States on June 16, 1995, making $52.8 million in its opening weekend, breaking \"Jurassic Park\"'s record for highest opening weekend gross of all-time (it was surpassed two years later by \"\"s $72.1 million). The film went on to gross $184 million in North America, and $152.5 million in other countries, totaling $336.53 million. The film earned more money than its predecessor \"Batman Returns\", and was the second-highest (behind \"Toy Story\") grossing film of 1995, in the U.S.\n\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 40% based on 58 reviews, with an average rating of 5.1/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Loud, excessively busy, and often boring, \"Batman Forever\" nonetheless has the charisma of Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones to offer mild relief.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 51 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A–\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\nPeter Travers said \"\"Batman Forever\" still gets in its licks. There's no fun machine this summer that packs more surprises.\" However, he criticized the film's excessive commercialism and felt that \"the script misses the pain Tim Burton caught in a man tormented by the long-ago murder of his parents\" seeing the Bruce Wayne of Kilmer as \"inexpressive\". Brian Lowry of \"Variety\" believed \"One does have to question the logic behind adding nipples to the hard-rubber batsuit. Whose idea was that supposed to be anyway, Alfred's? Some of the computer-generated Gotham cityscapes appear too obviously fake. Elliot Goldenthal's score, while serviceable, also isn't as stirring as Danny Elfman's work in the first two films.\"\n\nJames Berardinelli enjoyed the film. \"It's lighter, brighter, funnier, faster-paced, and a whole lot more colorful than before.\" Scott Beatty felt \"Tommy Lee Jones played Harvey Dent as a Joker knock-off rather than a multi-layered rogue.\" Lee Bermejo called \"Batman Forever\" \"unbearable\". Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert both gave the film mixed reviews, but with the former giving it a thumbs up and the latter a thumbs down. In his written review, Ebert wrote: \"Is the movie better entertainment? Well, it's great bubblegum for the eyes. Younger children will be able to process it more easily; some kids were led bawling from \"Batman Returns\" where the PG-13 rating was a joke.\" Mick LaSalle had a mixed reaction, concluding \"a shot of Kilmer's rubber buns at one point is guaranteed to bring squeals from the audience.\"\n\nAt the 68th Academy Awards, \"Batman Forever\" was nominated for Cinematography (lost to \"Braveheart\"), Sound Mixing (Donald O. Mitchell, Frank A. Montaño, Michael Herbick and Petur Hliddal; lost to \"Apollo 13\") and Sound Editing (John Leveque and Bruce Stambler) (also lost to \"Braveheart\"). \"Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me\" by U2 was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song (lost to \"Colors of the Wind\" from \"Pocahontas\"), but was also nominated for the Worst Original Song Golden Raspberry Award (lost to \"Walk Into the Wind\" from \"Showgirls\"). At the Saturn Awards, the film was nominated for Best Fantasy Film (lost to \"Babe\"), Make-up (lost to \"Seven\"), Special Effects (lost to \"Jumanji\") and Costume Design (lost to \"12 Monkeys\"). Composer Elliot Goldenthal was given a Grammy Award nomination. \"Batman Forever\" received six nominations at the 1996 MTV Movie Awards, four of which were divided between two categories (Carrey and Lee Jones for Best Villain; and Seal's \"Kiss from a Rose\" and U2's \"Hold Me\" in Best Song from a Movie). However, it won in just one category—Best Song from a Movie for Seal's \"Kiss from a Rose\".\n\nIn addition to a large line of toys and action figures from Kenner, the McDonald's food chain released several collectibles and mugs to coincide with the release of the film. Peter David and Alan Grant wrote separate novelizations of the film. Dennis O'Neil authored a comic book adaptation, with art by Michal Dutkiewicz.\n\nSix Flags Great Adventure theme park re-themed their \"Axis Chemical\" arena, home of the Batman stunt show, to resemble \"Batman Forever\", and the new show featured props from the film. Because of the mostly negative critical reaction however, the stunt arena was changed back to its original version after the season. Six Flags Over Texas featured a one-time fireworks show to promote the movie, and replica busts of Batman, Robin, Two-Face, and the Riddler can still be found in the Justice League store in the Looney Tunes U.S.A. section.\n\n"}
{"id": "4731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4731", "title": "Batman: Year One", "text": "Batman: Year One\n\n\"Year One\" later referred to as \"Batman: Year One\" is an American comic book story arc published by DC Comics, and recounts superhero Batman's first year as a crime-fighter. It was written by Frank Miller, illustrated by David Mazzucchelli, colored by Richmond Lewis, and lettered by Todd Klein. \"Batman: Year One\" originally appeared in issues #404–407 of the comic book title \"Batman\" in 1987. As well as recounting Batman's early crime fighting career, the story simultaneously examines the life of recently transferred officer James Gordon - eventually building towards their partnership.\n\nThere have been several reprints of the story: a hardcover, multiple trade paperback editions (one in standard comics paper with simpler coloring and one deluxe version with rich detailing in the colors — both colored by Richmond Lewis) and it has been included in \"The Complete Frank Miller Batman\" hardcover. The story arc was adapted into an in 2011.\n\nThe story recounts the beginning of Bruce Wayne's career as Batman and Jim Gordon's with the Gotham City Police Department. Bruce Wayne returns home to Gotham City at the age of twenty-five from training abroad in martial arts, man-hunting, and science for the past 12 years, and James Gordon moves to Gotham City with his wife, Barbara, after a transfer from Chicago. Both are swiftly acquainted with the corruption and violence of Gotham City, with Gordon witnessing his partner Detective Arnold John Flass assaulting an African-American teen for fun.\n\nAfter refusing a proposition from a teenage prostitute Holly Robinson, Bruce is reluctantly drawn into a brawl with her violent pimp and is attacked by several prostitutes, including dominatrix Selina Kyle. Two police officers shoot and take him in their squad car, but a dazed and bleeding Bruce breaks his handcuffs and causes a crash, dragging the police to a safe distance before fleeing. He reaches Wayne Manor barely alive and sits before his father’s bust, requesting guidance in his war on crime. A bat crashes through a window and settles on the bust, giving him the inspiration to become a bat.\n\nGordon soon works to rid corruption from the force, but, on orders from Commissioner Gillian Loeb, several officers attack him, including Flass, who personally threatens Gordon’s pregnant wife. In revenge, the recovering Gordon tracks Flass down, beats him, and leaves him naked and handcuffed in the snow.\n\nAs Gordon becomes a minor celebrity for several brave acts, Batman strikes for the first time, attacking a group of thieves. Batman soon works up the ladder, even attacking Flass while the latter was accepting a drug dealer’s bribe. After Batman interrupts a dinner party attended by many of Gotham’s corrupt politicians and crime bosses to announce his intention to bring them to justice, including Carmine \"The Roman\" Falcone, Loeb orders Gordon to bring him in by any means necessary.\n\nAs Gordon tries in vain to catch him, Batman attacks Falcone, stripping him naked and tying him up in his bed and dumping his car in the river, infuriating the mob boss. Assistant District Attorney Harvey Dent becomes Batman’s first ally, while Detective Sarah Essen and Gordon witness Batman save an old woman from a runaway truck, after Essen suggested Bruce Wayne as a Batman suspect. Essen holds Batman at gunpoint while Gordon is momentarily dazed, but Batman disarms her and flees to an abandoned building.\n\nClaiming the building has been scheduled for demolition, Loeb orders a bomb to be dropped on it, forcing Batman into the fortified basement, where he abandons his belt as it catches fire. A SWAT team led by trigger-happy officer Branden is sent in and attempts to trap Batman in the basement. After tranquilizing Branden, Batman dodges bullets as Branden's team opens fire on him, barely managing to survive after two bullet wounds. Enraged as the team’s carelessly fired bullets injure several people outside, Batman beats the team into submission and, after using a device to attract the bats of his cave to him, he flees amid the chaos. After witnessing him in action, Selina Kyle dons a costume of her own to begin a life of crime.\n\nGordon has a brief affair with Essen, while Batman intimidates a mob drug dealer for information. The dealer comes to Gordon to testify against Flass, who is brought up on charges. Upset with Gordon's exploits, Loeb blackmails Gordon against pressing charges with proof of his affair. After bringing Barbara with him to interview Bruce Wayne, investigating his connection to Batman, Gordon confesses the affair to her.\n\nBatman sneaks into Falcone’s manor, overhearing a plan against Gordon, but is interrupted when Selina Kyle, hoping to build a reputation after her robberies were pinned on Batman, attacks Falcone and his bodyguards, aided from afar by Batman. Identifying Falcone’s plan as the morning comes, the uncostumed Bruce leaves to help.\n\nWhile leaving home, Gordon spots a motorcyclist enter his garage. Suspicious, Gordon enters to see Johnny Vitti, Falcone’s nephew, and his thugs holding his family hostage. Gordon decisively shoots the thugs and chases Vitti, who has fled with the baby. The mysterious motorcyclist, now revealed to the reader as Bruce Wayne, rushes out to chase Vitti. Gordon blows out Vitti's car tire on a bridge and the two fight hand-to-hand, with Gordon losing his glasses, before Vitti and James Gordon, Jr. fall over the side. Bruce leaps over the railing and saves the baby. Gordon realizes that he is standing before an unmasked Batman, but says that he is \"practically blind without [his] glasses,\" and lets Bruce go.\n\nIn the final scenes of the comic, Flass turns on Loeb, supplying Dent with evidence and testimony, and Loeb resigns. Gordon is promoted to captain and stands on the rooftop waiting to meet Batman to discuss somebody called the Joker, who is plotting to poison the reservoir.\n\n\"Batman: Year One\" has received widespread critical acclaim. IGN Comics ranked \"Batman: Year One\" number 2 on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels (behind \"\"The Dark Knight Returns\"\", also by Miller) and said that \"no other book before or since has quite captured the realism, the grit and the humanity of Gordon and Batman so perfectly.\" The website added, \"It's not only one of the most important comics ever written, it's also among the best.\"\n\nWriter Matthew K. Manning in the \"1980s\" chapter of \"DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle\" (2010) praises the story for both Miller's \"realistic characterization\" and Mazzucchelli's \"brilliant iconic\" artwork.\n\nBefore the New 52 \"Batman: Year One\" existed in the mainstream DC continuity, and in the same continuity as the other storylines in Miller's \"Dark Knight Universe\", consisting of \"The Dark Knight Returns\", its sequel \"The Dark Knight Strikes Again\", \"\", \"The Dark Knight Returns: The Last Crusade\", \"Spawn/Batman\", and \"All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder\". However, following the New 52 reboot, \"\" replaced \"Year One\" as the official origin for Batman and \"Year One\" was relegated to the continuity of the other Frank Miller storylines.\n\nFollowing \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", DC rebooted many of its titles. \"Year One\" was followed by \"\", but the 1994 \"\" crossover erased \"Year Two\" from continuity. In another continuity re-arrangement, \"Catwoman: Year One\" (\"Catwoman Annual\" #2, 1995) posited that Selina Kyle had not actually been a prostitute, but, rather, a thief posing as one in order to commit crimes.\n\nLaunched in 1989, following the success of the film \"Batman\", the title \"\" examines crime-fighting exploits primarily, not exclusively, from the first four to five years of Batman's career. This title rotated in creative teams and time placement, but several stories directly relate to the events of \"Year One\", especially the first arc \"Batman: Shaman\". In 1998, Jeph Loeb and Tim Sale created \"\" and \"\", two 13-issue maxiseries that recounted Batman's early years as a crime-fighter following the events of Miller's original story and retold the origins of Two-Face and Dick Grayson. The \"Year One\" story was continued in the 2005 graphic novel \"\", following up on Gordon informing Batman about the Joker, and thus recounting their first official encounter. Two other stories, \"Batman and the Monster Men\" and \"Batman and the Mad Monk\" tie into the same time period of Batman's career, filling in the gap between Year One and the Man Who Laughs. Following the 2007 cancellation of \"Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight\", \"Batman Confidential\" began publication, depicting Batman's early years, although some of these stories take place several years after Miller's \"Year One\" story because Batman is depicted wearing his \"yellow oval\" costume. The comics \"\" and \"\" are recommended after reading \"\", describe his sidekicks origin stories.\n\nIn \"Gotham\", the second half of Season 4 will be inspired by \"Batman: Year One\".\n\n\nIn 2011, a was released as a DC Universe Animated Original Movie. It was produced by Bruce Timm, co-directed by Lauren Montgomery and Sam Liu. It features the voices of Benjamin McKenzie as Bruce Wayne/Batman, Bryan Cranston as James Gordon, Eliza Dushku as Selina Kyle/Catwoman, Katee Sackhoff as Sarah Essen, Grey DeLisle as Barbara Gordon, Jon Polito as Commissioner Loeb, Alex Rocco as Carmine 'The Roman' Falcone, and Jeff Bennett as Alfred Pennyworth. The movie premiered at Comic-Con, with a Catwoman short shown in October.\n\n"}
{"id": "4733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4733", "title": "Bi-directional text", "text": "Bi-directional text\n\nBi-directional text is text containing text in both text directionalities, both right-to-left (RTL or dextrosinistral) and left-to-right (LTR or sinistrodextral). It generally involves text containing different types of alphabets, but may also refer to boustrophedon, which is changing text directionality in each row.\n\nSome writing systems of the world, including the Arabic and Hebrew scripts or derived systems such as the Persian, Urdu, and Yiddish scripts, are written in a form known as right-to-left (RTL), in which writing begins at the right-hand side of a page and concludes at the left-hand side. This is different from the left-to-right (LTR) direction used by most writing systems in the world. When LTR text is mixed with RTL in the same paragraph, each type of text is written in its own direction, which is known as \"bi-directional text\". This can get rather complex when multiple levels of quotation are used.\n\nMany computer programs fail to display bi-directional text correctly.\nFor example, the Hebrew name Sarah (שרה) is spelled: sin (ש) (which appears rightmost), then resh (ר), and finally heh (ה) (which should appear leftmost).\n\n\"Note: Some web browsers may display the Hebrew text in this article in the opposite direction.\"\n\nBidirectional script support is the capability of a computer system to correctly display bi-directional text. The term is often shortened to \"BiDi\" or \"bidi\".\n\nEarly computer installations were designed only to support a single writing system, typically for left-to-right scripts based on the Latin alphabet only. Adding new character sets and character encodings enabled a number of other left-to-right scripts to be supported, but did not easily support right-to-left scripts such as Arabic or Hebrew, and mixing the two was not practical. Right-to-left scripts were introduced through encodings like ISO/IEC 8859-6 and ISO/IEC 8859-8, storing the letters (usually) in writing and reading order. It is possible to simply flip the left-to-right display order to a right-to-left display order, but doing this sacrifices the ability to correctly display left-to-right scripts. With bidirectional script support, it is possible to mix scripts from different scripts on the same page, regardless of writing direction.\n\nIn particular, the Unicode standard provides foundations for complete BiDi support, with detailed rules as to how mixtures of left-to-right and right-to-left scripts are to be encoded and displayed.\n\nThe Unicode standard calls for characters to be ordered 'logically', i.e. in the sequence they are intended to be interpreted, as opposed to 'visually', the sequence they appear. This distinction is relevant for bidi support because at any bidi transition, the visual presentation ceases to be the 'logical' one. Thus, in order to offer bidi support, Unicode prescribes an algorithm for how to convert the logical sequence of characters into the correct visual presentation. For this purpose, the Unicode encoding standard divides all its characters into one of four types: 'strong', 'weak', 'neutral', and 'explicit formatting'.\n\nStrong characters are those with definite directionality. Examples of this type of character include most alphabetic characters, syllabic characters, Han ideographs, non-European or non-Arabic digits, and punctuation characters \"that are specific to only those scripts\".\n\nWeak characters are those with vague directionality. Examples of this type of character include European digits, Eastern Arabic-Indic digits, arithmetic symbols, and currency symbols. Punctuation symbols that are common to many scripts, such as the colon, comma, full-stop, and the no-break-space also fall within this category.\n\n Unless a directional override is present numbers are always encoded (and entered) big-endian, and the numerals rendered LTR. The weak directionality only applies to the placement of the number in its entirety.\n\nNeutral characters have directionality indeterminable without context. Examples include paragraph separators, tabs, and most other whitespace characters.\n\nExplicit formatting characters, also referred to as \"directional formatting characters\", are special Unicode sequences that direct the unicode algorithm to modify its default behavior. These characters are subdivided into \"marks\", \"embeddings\", \"isolates\", and \"overrides\". Their effects continue until the occurrence of either a paragraph separator, or a \"pop\" character.\n\nIf a \"weak\" character is followed by another \"weak\" character, the algorithm will look at the first neighbouring \"strong\" character. Sometimes this leads to unintentional display errors. These errors are corrected or prevented with \"pseudo-strong\" characters. Such Unicode control characters are called \"marks\". The mark ( or ) is to be inserted into a location to make an enclosed weak character inherit its writing direction.\n\nFor example, to correctly display the for an English name brand (LTR) in an Arabic (RTL) passage, an LRM mark is inserted after the trademark symbol if the symbol is not followed by LTR text. If the LRM mark is not added, the weak character ™ will be neighbored by a strong LTR character and a strong RTL character. Hence, in an RTL context, it will be considered to be RTL, and displayed in an incorrect order.\n\nThe \"embedding\" directional formatting characters are the classical Unicode method of explicit formatting, and as of Unicode 6.3, are being discouraged in favor of \"isolates\". An \"embedding\" signals that a piece of text is to be treated as directionally distinct. The text within the scope of the embedding formatting characters is not independent of the surrounding text. Also, characters within an embedding can affect the ordering of characters outside. Unicode 6.3 recognized that directional embeddings usually have too strong an effect on their surroundings and are thus unnecessarily difficult to use.\n\nThe \"isolate\" directional formatting characters signal that a piece of text is to be treated as directionally isolated from its surroundings. As of Unicode 6.3, these are the formatting characters that are being encouraged in new documents – once target platforms are known to support them. These formatting characters were introduced after it became apparent that directional embeddings usually have too strong an effect on their surroundings and are thus unnecessarily difficult to use. Unlike the legacy 'embedding' directional formatting characters, 'isolate' characters have no effect on the ordering of the text outside their scope. Isolates can be nested, and may be placed within embeddings and overrides.\n\nThe \"override\" directional formatting characters allow for special cases, such as for part numbers (e.g. to force a part number made of mixed English, digits and Hebrew letters to be written from right to left), and are recommended to be avoided wherever possible. As is true of the other directional formatting characters, \"overrides\" can be nested one inside another, and in embeddings and isolates.\n\nThe \"pop\" directional formatting characters terminate the scope of the most recent \"embedding\", \"override\", or \"isolate\".\n\nIn the algorithm, each sequence of concatenated strong characters is called a \"run\". A \"weak\" character that is located between two \"strong\" characters with the same orientation will inherit their orientation. A \"weak\" character that is located between two \"strong\" characters with a different writing direction, will inherit the main context's writing direction (in an LTR document the character will become LTR, in an RTL document, it will become RTL).\n\nEgyptian hieroglyphs can be written bi-directionally, where the signs had a distinct \"head\" that faced the beginning of a line and \"tail\" that faced the end.\n\nChinese characters can be written in either direction as well as vertically (top to bottom then right to left), especially in signs (such as plaques), but the orientation of the individual characters is never changed. This can often be seen on tour buses in China, where the company name customarily runs from the front of the vehicle to its rear — that is, from right to left on the right side of the bus, and from left to right on the left side of the bus. English texts on the right side of the vehicle are also quite commonly written in reverse order. (See pictures of tour bus and post vehicle below.)\n\nLikewise, other CJK scripts made up of the same square characters, such as the Japanese writing system and Korean writing system, can also be written in any direction, although left-to-right, top-to-bottom and top-to-bottom, right-to-left are most common.\nBoustrophedon is a writing style found in ancient Greek inscriptions and in Hungarian runes. This method of writing alternates direction, and usually reverses the individual characters, on each successive line.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4734", "title": "Bernoulli's inequality", "text": "Bernoulli's inequality\n\nIn real analysis, Bernoulli's inequality (named after Jacob Bernoulli) is an inequality that approximates exponentiations of 1 + \"x\".\n\nThe inequality states that\n\nfor every integer \"r\" ≥ 0 and every real number \"x\" ≥ −1. \nIf the exponent \"r\" is even, then the inequality is valid for \"all\" real numbers \"x\". The strict version of the inequality reads\n\nfor every integer \"r\" ≥ 2 and every real number \"x\" ≥ −1 with \"x\" ≠ 0.\n\nThere is also a generalized version that says for every real number r ≥ 1 and real number x ≥ -1,\n\nwhile for 0 ≤ \"r\" ≤ 1 and real number x ≥ -1,\n\nBernoulli's inequality is often used as the crucial step in the proof of other inequalities. It can itself be proved using mathematical induction, as shown below.\n\nJacob Bernoulli first published the inequality in his treatise “Positiones Arithmeticae de Seriebus Infinitis” (Basel, 1689), where he used the inequality often.\n\nAccording to Joseph E. Hofmann, Über die Exercitatio Geometrica des M. A. Ricci (1963), p. 177, the inequality is actually due to Sluse in his Mesolabum (1668 edition), Chapter IV \"De maximis & minimis\".\n\nFor \"r\" = 0,\n\nis equivalent to 1 ≥ 1 which is true as required.\n\nNow suppose the statement is true for \"r\" = \"k\":\n\nThen it follows that\n\nBy induction we conclude the statement is true for all \"r\" ≥ 0.\n\nThe exponent \"r\" can be generalized to an arbitrary real number as follows: if \"x\" > −1, then\n\nfor \"r\" ≤ 0 or \"r\" ≥ 1, and\n\nfor 0 ≤ \"r\" ≤ 1.\n\nThis generalization can be proved by comparing derivatives.\nAgain, the strict versions of these inequalities require \"x\" ≠ 0 and \"r\" ≠ 0, 1.\n\nThe following inequality estimates the \"r\"-th power of 1 + \"x\" from the other side. For any real numbers \"x\", \"r\" > 0, one has\n\nwhere \"e\" = 2.718... This may be proved using the inequality (1 + 1/\"k\") < \"e\".\n\nAn alternative form of Bernoulli's inequality for formula_11 and formula_12 is:\n\nThis can be proved (for integer t) by using the formula for geometric series: (using y=1-x)\n\nor equivalently formula_15\n\nUsing AM-GM \n\nAn elementary proof for formula_16 can be given using Weighted AM-GM. \n\nLet formula_17 be two non-negative real constants. By Weighted AM-GM on formula_18 with weights formula_17 respectively, we get\n\nformula_20\n\nNote that \n\nformula_21\n\nand\n\nformula_22\n\nso our inequality is equivalent to\n\nformula_23\n\nAfter substituting formula_24 (bearing in mind that this implies formula_16) our inequality turns into \n\nformula_26 which is Bernoulli's inequality.\n\nUsing Binomial theorem\n\n(1) For , formula_27\nObviously, formula_28\n\nThus, formula_29\n\n(2) For , it is obvious that formula_30\n\n(3) For , let , then \n\nReplace with , we have formula_31\n\nAlso, according to the binomial theorem, formula_32\n\nthenformula_33\n\nNotice that formula_34\n\nTherefore, we can see that each binomial term formula_35 is multiplied by a factor formula_36 , and that will make each term smaller than the term before.\n\nFor that reason, formula_37\n\nHence, formula_38\n\nReplace with back, we get formula_29\n\nNotice that by using binomial theorem, we can only prove the cases when r is a positive integer or zero.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4735", "title": "Benjamin Franklin-class submarine", "text": "Benjamin Franklin-class submarine\n\nThe \"Benjamin Franklin\"-class submarine was a group of US ballistic missile submarines that were in Navy service from the 1960s–2000s. The class was an evolutionary development from the earlier of fleet ballistic missile submarine. Having quieter machinery and other improvements, it is considered a separate class. A subset of this class is the re-engineered 640 class starting with The primary difference was that they were built under the new SUBSAFE rules after the loss of the USS Thresher, earlier boats of the class had to be retrofitted to meet SUBSAFE requirements. The \"Benjamin Franklin\" class, together with the , , , and classes, composed the \"41 for Freedom\" that was the Navy's primary contribution to the nuclear deterrent force through the late 1980s. This class and the \"James Madison\" class are combined with the \"Lafayette\"s in some references.\n\nThe \"Benjamin Franklin\"-class submarines were built with the Polaris A-3 ballistic missile, and in the early 1970s were converted to carry the Poseidon C-3 missile. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, six boats were further modified to carry the Trident I (C-4) missile, along with six \"James Madison\"-class boats. These were \"Benjamin Franklin\", \"Simon Bolivar\", \"George Bancroft\", \"Henry L. Stimson\", \"Francis Scott Key\", and \"Mariano G. Vallejo\".\n\nDue to the loss of in April 1963, this class was designed to SUBSAFE standards and its equipment was similar to the fast attack submarines (SSNs). Previous US SSBNs except the \"George Washington\" class had equipment similar to the SSNs.\n\nThis class can be distinguished by the fairwater planes' location halfway up the sail; the \"Lafayette\"s and \"James Madison\"s had the fairwater planes in the upper front portion of the sail.\n\nTwo submarines of this class were converted for delivery of up to 66 SEALs or other Special Operations Forces each. In the early 1990s, to make room for the ballistic missile submarines within the limits set by the SALT II strategic arms limitation treaty, the ballistic missile tubes of and were disabled. Those boats were redesignated special operations attack submarines and given attack submarine (SSN) hull classification symbols. They were equipped with dry deck shelters to accommodate SEAL Delivery Vehicles or other equipment.\n\nThe \"Benjamin Franklin\"s were decommissioned between 1992 and 2002 due to a combination of SALT II treaty limitations as the SSBNs entered service, age, and the collapse of the Soviet Union. USS \"Kamehameha\" was decommissioned on 2 April 2002, the last ship of the \"Benjamin Franklin\" class to be decommissioned.\n\nThe sail of \"George Bancroft\" is preserved at the Naval Submarine Base King's Bay, Georgia. \"James K. Polk\"s sail is on display at the National Museum of Nuclear Science & History in Albuquerque, New Mexico. \"Mariano G. Vallejo\"'s sail is preserved at Mare Island, California, where she was built. The sail of Lewis and Clark is on display at the Patriot's Point Maritime Museum in Charleston, South Carolina.\n\nSubmarines of the \"Benjamin Franklin\" class:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4736", "title": "Bastard Operator From Hell", "text": "Bastard Operator From Hell\n\nThe Bastard Operator From Hell (BOFH) is a fictional rogue computer operator who takes out his anger on users and others who pester him with their computer problems, uses his expertise against his enemies and manipulates his employer.\n\nSeveral other people have written stories about BOFHs, but those by Simon Travaglia are considered canonical. \nThe BOFH stories were originally posted in 1992 to Usenet by Travaglia, with some being reprinted in \"Datamation.\" They were published weekly from 1995 to 1999 in \"Network Week.\" Since 2000 they have been published regularly in \"The Register\" (UK). Several collections of the stories have been published as books.\n\nBy extension, the term is also used to refer to any system administrator who displays the qualities of the original.\n\nThe early accounts of the BOFH took place in a university; later the scenes were set in an office workplace. In 2000 (BOFH 2k), the BOFH and his pimply-faced youth (PFY) assistant moved to a new company.\n\n\n\nThe main protagonist in Charles Stross's \"The Laundry Files\" series of novels named himself Bob Oliver Francis Howard in reference to the BOFH. As Bob Howard is a self-chosen pseudonym, and Bob is a network manager when not working as a computational demonologist, the name is all too appropriate. In the novella 'Pimpf' he acquires a pimply-faced young assistant by the name of Peter-Fred Young.\n\n"}
{"id": "4737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4737", "title": "Brownie McGhee", "text": "Brownie McGhee\n\nWalter Brown \"Brownie\" McGhee (November 30, 1915 – February 16, 1996) was an African-American folk music and Piedmont blues singer and guitarist, best known for his collaboration with the harmonica player Sonny Terry.\n\nMcGhee was born in Knoxville, Tennessee, and grew up in Kingsport, Tennessee. At about the age of four he contracted polio, which incapacitated his leg. His brother Granville \"Sticks\"(or \"Stick\") McGhee, who also later became a musician and composed the famous song \"Drinkin' Wine Spo-Dee-o-Dee,\" was nicknamed for pushing young Brownie around in a cart. Their father, George McGhee, was a factory worker, known around University Avenue for playing guitar and singing. Brownie's uncle made him a guitar from a tin marshmallow box and a piece of board.\n\nMcGhee spent much of his youth immersed in music, singing with a local harmony group, the Golden Voices Gospel Quartet, and teaching himself to play guitar. He also played the five-string banjo and ukulele and studied piano. Surgery funded by the March of Dimes enabled McGhee to walk.\n\nAt age 22, McGhee became a traveling musician, working in the Rabbit Foot Minstrels and befriending Blind Boy Fuller, whose guitar playing influenced him greatly. After Fuller's death in 1941, J. B. Long of Columbia Records promoted McGhee as \"Blind Boy Fuller No. 2.\" By that time, McGhee was recording for Columbia's subsidiary Okeh Records in Chicago, but his real success came after he moved to New York in 1942, when he teamed up with Sonny Terry, whom he had known since 1939, when Terry was Fuller's harmonica player. The pairing was an overnight success. They recorded and toured together until around 1980. As a duo, Terry and McGhee did most of their work from 1958 until 1980, spending 11 months of each year touring and recording dozens of albums.\n\nDespite their later fame as \"pure\" folk artists playing for white audiences, in the 1940s Terry and McGhee had attempted to be successful recording artists, fronting a jump blues combo with honking saxophone and rolling piano, variously calling themselves Brownie McGhee and his Jook House Rockers or Sonny Terry and his Buckshot Five, often with Champion Jack Dupree and Big Chief Ellis. They also appeared in the original Broadway productions of \"Finian's Rainbow\" and \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\".\nDuring the blues revival of the 1960s, Terry and McGhee were popular on the concert and music festival circuits, occasionally adding new material but usually remaining faithful to their roots and playing to the tastes of their audiences.\n\nLate in his life, McGhee appeared in small roles in films and on television. He and Terry appeared in the 1979 Steve Martin comedy \"The Jerk\". In 1987, McGhee gave a small but memorable performance as the ill-fated blues singer Toots Sweet in the supernatural thriller movie \"Angel Heart.\" In his review of \"Angel Heart\", the critic Roger Ebert singled out McGhee for praise, declaring that he delivered a \"performance that proves [saxophonist] Dexter Gordon isn't the only old musician who can act.\" McGhee appeared in the television series \"Family Ties\", in a 1988 episode entitled \"The Blues, Brother\", in which he played the fictional blues musician Eddie Dupre. He also appeared in the television series \"Matlock\", in a 1989 episode entitled \"The Blues Singer\".\n\nHappy Traum, a former guitar student of McGhee's, edited a blues guitar instruction guide and songbook, \"Guitar Styles of Brownie McGhee\", published in 1971, in which McGhee, between lessons, talked about his life and the blues. The autobiographical section features McGhee talking about growing up, his musical beginnings, and a history of the blues from the 1930s onward.\n\nOne of McGhee's last concert appearances was at the 1995 Chicago Blues Festival.\n\nMcGhee died of stomach cancer in February 1996 in Oakland, California, at age 80.\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4739", "title": "International Bureau of Weights and Measures", "text": "International Bureau of Weights and Measures\n\nThe International Bureau of Weights and Measures () is an intergovernmental organization, one of three such organisations established to maintain the International System of Units (SI) under the terms of the Metre Convention (\"Convention du Mètre\"). The organisation is usually referred to by its French initialism, BIPM.\n\nThe BIPM reports to the International Committee for Weights and Measures (), which is in turn overseen by periodic meetings of the General Conference on Weights and Measures (). These organizations are also commonly referred to by their French initialisms.\n\nThe BIPM was created on 20 May 1875, following the signing of the Metre Convention, a treaty among 51 nations (). It is based at the Pavillon de Breteuil in Sèvres, France, a site (originally ) granted to the Bureau by the French Government in 1876, where it enjoys extraterritorial status, a status that was clarified by the French decree No 70-820 of 9 September 1970.\n\nUnder the authority of the Metric Convention, the BIPM helps to ensure uniformity of SI weights and measures around the world. It does so through a series of consultative committees, whose members are the national metrology laboratories of the Convention's member states, and through its own laboratory work.\n\nThe BIPM carries out measurement-related research. It takes part in and organises international comparisons of national measurement standards and performs calibrations for member states.\n\nThe BIPM has an important role in maintaining accurate worldwide time of day. It combines, analyses, and averages the official atomic time standards of member nations around the world to create a single, official Coordinated Universal Time (UTC).\n\nThe BIPM is also the keeper of the international prototype of the kilogram.\n\nSince its establishment, the directors of the BIPM have been:\n\n"}
{"id": "4741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4741", "title": "Bayonne", "text": "Bayonne\n\nBayonne (; Gascon: \"Baiona\" ; ; ) is a city and commune and one of the two sub-prefectures of the department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques, in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of south-western France. It is located at the confluence of the Nive and Adour rivers in the northern part of the cultural region of Basque Country as well as the southern part of Gascony where the Aquitaine basin joins the beginning of the Pre-Pyrenees.\n\nTogether with nearby Anglet, Biarritz, Saint-Jean-de-Luz, and several smaller communes, Bayonne forms an urban area with 288,359 inhabitants at the 2012 census, 45,855 of whom lived in the city of Bayonne proper.\n\nThe site on the left bank of the Nive and the Adour was probably occupied before ancient times as a fortified enclosure was attested in the 1st century at the time when the Tarbelli occupied the territory. Archaeological studies have confirmed the presence of a Roman castrum, a stronghold in Novempopulania at the end of the 4th century before the city was populated by the Vascones.\n\nIn 1023 Bayonne was the capital of Labourd and, in the 12th century, extended to and beyond the Nive. At that time the first bridge was built over the Adour. The city came under the domination of the English in 1152 through the marriage of Eleanor of Aquitaine: it became militarily and, above all, commercially important thanks to maritime trade. It was separated from the Viscount of Labourd in 1177 by Richard the Lion Heart. In 1451 the city was taken by the Crown of France after the Hundred Years' War. The loss of trade with the English and the silting up of the river as well as the movement of the city towards the north weakened it. The district of Saint-Esprit developed anyway thanks to the arrival of a Jewish population fleeing the Spanish Inquisition. From this community Bayonne gained its reputation for chocolate. The course of the Adour was changed in 1578 under the direction of Louis de Foix and the river returned to its former mouth, returning business lost to Bayonne for over a hundred years. In the 17th century the city was fortified by Vauban. In 1814 Bayonne and its surroundings were the scene of fighting between the Napoleonic troops and the Spanish-Anglo-Portuguese coalition led by the Duke of Wellington: the city then underwent its final siege.\n\nIn 1951 the Lacq gas field was discovered whose extracted sulphur and associated oil are shipped from the port of Bayonne. During the second half of the 20th century many housing estates were built forming new districts on the periphery and the city was extended to form a conurbation with Anglet and Biarritz: this agglomeration became the heart of a vast Basque-Landes urban area.\n\nBayonne was, in 2014, a commune with over 45,000 inhabitants, the heart of the urban area of Bayonne and of the \"Agglomeration Côte Basque-Adour\" which includes Anglet and Biarritz. It is an important part of the Basque \"Bayonne-San Sebastián Eurocity\" and it plays the role of economic capital of the Adour basin. Modern industry—metallurgy and chemicals—are established to take advantage of procurement opportunities and sea shipments through the harbour. It is now mostly business services which today represent the largest source of employment. Bayonne is also a cultural capital, a city with strong Basque and Gascon influences and a rich historical past. Its heritage lies in its architecture, the diversity of collections in museums, its gastronomic specialties, and traditional events such as the famous Fêtes de Bayonne.\n\nThe inhabitants of the commune are known as \"Bayonnais\" or \"Bayonnaises\".\n\nBayonne is located in the south-west of France on the western border between Basque Country and Gascony. It developed at the confluence of the Adour and its tributary on the left bank, the Nive, 6 km from the Atlantic coast. The commune was part of the Basque province of Labourd.\n\nBayonne occupies a territory characterized by a flat relief to the west and to the north towards the Landes forest, tending to slightly raise towards the south and east. The city has developed at the confluence of the Adour and Nive from the ocean. The meeting point of the two rivers coincides with a narrowing of the Adour valley. Above this the alluvial plain extends for nearly towards both Tercis-les-Bains and Peyrehorade, and is characterized by swampy meadows called \"barthes\" which are influenced by floods and high tides. Downstream from this point the river has shaped a large bed in the sand dunes creating a significant bottleneck at the confluence.\n\nThe occupation of the hill that dominates this narrowing of the valley developed through a gradual spread across the lowlands by building embankments and the aggradation from flood soil.\n\nThe Nive has played a leading role in the development of the Bayonne river system in recent geological time by the formation of alluvial terraces that form the sub-soil of Bayonne beneath the surface accumulations of silt and aeolian sands. The drainage network of the western Pre-Pyrenees evolved mostly from the Quaternary from south-east to northwest oriented east-west. The Adour was then captured by the gaves and this system, together with the Nive, led to the emergence of a new alignment of the lower Adour and the Adour-Nive confluence. This capture has been dated to the early Quaternary (80,000 years ago).\n\nBefore this capture the Nive had deposited pebbles from the Mindel glaciation of medium to large sizes that slowed erosion of the hills causing the bottleneck at Bayonne. After the deposit of the lowest alluvial terrace ( high at Grand Bayonne), the course of the Adour became fixed in its lower reaches.\n\nSubsequent to these deposits there was a rise in sea level in the Holocene period (from 15,000 to 5000 years ago) which explains the invasion of the lower valleys with fine sand, peat, and mud with a thickness of more than below the current bed of the Adour and the Nive in Bayonne. These same deposits are spread across the barthes.\n\nIn the late Quaternary the topographic physiognomy we know today was formed—i.e. a set of hills overlooking a swampy lowland. The promontory of Bassussarry–Marracq ultimately extended to the labourdin foothills, dying out at the Grand Bayonne hill is an example. Similarly, on the right bank of the Nive, the heights of Château-Neuf (Mocoron Hill) met the latest advance of the plateau of Saint-Pierre-d'Irube (height ). On the right bank of the Adour the heights of Castelnau (today the citadel) with an altitude of , and Fort (today Saint-Esprit) with an altitude of rise above the Barthes of the Adour, the Nive, Bourgneuf, Saint-Frédéric, Sainte-Croix, Aritxague, and Pontots.\n\nThe area of the commune is and its altitude varies between .\n\nThe city is traversed by the Adour. The river is part of the Natura 2000 network from its source at Bagnères-de-Bigorre to its exit to the Atlantic Ocean after Bayonne, between Tarnos (Landes) for the right bank and Anglet (Pyrénées-Atlantiques) for the left bank.\n\nApart from the Nive, which converges on the left bank of the Adour after of a sometimes tumultuous course, two tributaries join the Adour in Bayonne commune: the \"Ruisseau de Portou\" and the \"Ruisseau du Moulin Esbouc\". Tributaries of the Nive are the \"Ruisseau de Hillans\" and the \"Ruisseau d'Urdaintz\" which both rise in the commune.\n\nThe nearest weather station is that of Biarritz-Anglet.\n\nThe climate of Bayonne is relatively similar to that of its neighbour Biarritz, described below, with fairly heavy rainfall; The oceanic climate is due to the proximity of the Atlantic Ocean. The average winter temperature is around 8 °C and is around 20 °C in summer. The lowest temperature recorded was −12.7 °C on 16 January 1985 and the highest 40.6 °C on 4 August 2003. Rains on the Basque coast are rarely persistent except during winter storms. They often take the form of intense thunderstorms of short duration.\n\nBayonne is located at the intersection of the A63 autoroute (Bordeaux-Spain) and the D1 extension of the A64 autoroute (towards Toulouse). The city is served by three interchanges—two of them on the A63: exit (Bayonne Nord) serves the northern districts of Bayonne but also allows quick access to the centre while exit (Bayonne Sud) provides access to the south and also serves Anglet. The third exit is the D1 / A64 via the Mousserolles interchange (exit Bayonne Mousserolles) which links the district of the same name and also serves the neighbouring communes of Mouguerre and Saint-Pierre-d'Irube.\n\nBayonne was traversed by Route nationale 10 connecting Paris to Hendaye but this is now downgraded to a departmental road D810. Route nationale 117, linking Bayonne to Toulouse has been downgraded to departmental road D817.\n\nThere are several bridges over both the Nive and the Adour linking the various districts.\n\nComing from upstream on the Adour there is the A63 bridge, then the Saint-Frédéric bridge which carries the D 810, then the railway bridge that replaced the old Eiffel iron bridge, the Saint-Esprit bridge, and finally the Grenet bridge. The Saint-Esprit bridge connects the Saint-Esprit district to the Amiral-Bergeret dock just upstream of the confluence with the river Nive. In 1845 the old bridge, originally made ??of wood, was rebuilt in masonry with seven arches supporting a deck wide. It was then called the Nemours Bridge in honour of Louis of Orleans, sixth Duke of Nemours, who laid the first stone. The bridge was finally called Saint-Esprit. Until 1868 the bridge had a moving span near the left bank. It was expanded in 1912 to facilitate the movement of horse-drawn carriages and motor vehicles.\n\nOn the Nive coming from upstream to downstream there is the A63 bridge then the \"Pont Blanc\" (White bridge) railway bridge, and then D810 bridge, the Génie bridge (or \"Pont Millitaire\"), the Pannecau bridge, the Marengo bridge leading to the covered markets, and the Mayou Bridge The Pannecau bridge was long named \"Bertaco bridge\" and was rebuilt in masonry under Napoleon III. According to François Lafitte Houssat, \"[...] a municipal ordinance of 1327 provided for the imprisonment of any quarrellsome woman of bad character in an iron cage dropped into the waters of the Nive River from the bridge. The practice lasted until 1780 [...]\" This punishment bore the evocative name of \"cubainhade\".\n\nThe commune is traversed by the \"Vélodyssée\". Bicycle paths are located along the left bank of the Adour, a large part of the left bank of the Nive, and along various axes of the city where there are some bicycle lanes. The city offers free bicycles on loan.\n\nMost of the lines of the \"Chronoplus\" bus network operated by the \"Transdev agglomeration of Bayonne\" link Bayonne to other communes in the urban transport perimeter: Anglet, Biarritz, Bidart, Boucau, Saint-Pierre-d'Irube and Tarnos The Bayonne free shuttle Bayonne serves the city centre (Grand and Petit Bayonne) by connecting several parking stations; other free shuttles perform other short trips within the commune.\n\nBayonne is connected to many cities in the western half of the department such as Saint-Jean-de-Luz and Saint-Palais by the Pyrenees-Atlantiques long distance coach network of \"Transport 64\" managed by the General Council. Since the network restructuring in the summer of 2013, the lines converge on Bayonne. Bayonne is also served by services from the Landes departmental network, \"XL'R\".\n\nThe Gare de Bayonne is located in the Saint-Esprit district and is an important station on the Bordeaux-Irun railway. It is also the terminus of lines leading from Toulouse to Bayonne and from Bayonne to Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port. It is served by TGV, Intercités, Lunéa, and TER Aquitaine trains (to Hendaye, Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, Dax, Bordeaux, Pau, and Tarbes).\n\nBayonne is served by the Biarritz – Anglet – Bayonne Airport (IATA code: BIQ • ICAO code: LFBZ), located on the communal territories of Anglet and Biarritz. The airport was returned to service in 1954 after repair of damage from bombing during the Second World War.\n\nAirport management is carried out by the joint association for the development and operation of the airport of Biarritz-Anglet-Bayonne, which includes the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Bayonne Basque Country, the agglomeration of Côte Basque-Adour, the departments of Pyrénées-Atlantiques and Landes, and the commune of Saint-Jean-de-Luz. The airport of Biarritz-Anglet-Bayonne had nearly 1.1 million passengers in 2013. It has regular connections to Paris-Orly, Paris-CDG, Lyon, Nice, Geneva, and London Stansted and from March to October 2014 had connections with: Marseille, Strasbourg, Lille, Brussels South Charleroi Airport, Dublin, Stockholm-Skavsta, Stockholm-Arlanda, London-Gatwick, Copenhagen, Oslo, and Helsinki. Airline companies serving the airport at 1 November 2014 were: Air France, Etihad Regional, EasyJet, Finnair, Hop!, Ryanair, SAS, Twin Jet, and Volotea.\n\nWhile the modern Basque spelling is \"Baiona\" and the same in Gascon Occitan, \"the name \"Bayonne\" poses a number of problems both historical and linguistic which have still not been clarified\". There are different interpretations of its meaning.\n\nThe termination \"-onne\" in \"Bayonne\" can come from many in hydronyms \"-onne\" or toponyms derived from that. In certain cases the element \"-onne\" follows an Indo-European theme: \"*ud-r/n\" (Greek \"húdōr\" giving hydro, Gothic \"watt\" meaning \"water\") hence \"*udnā\" meaning \"water\" giving \"unna\" then \"onno\" in the glossary of Vienne. \"Unna\" therefore would refer to the Adour. This toponymic type evoking a river traversing a locality is common. The appellative \"unna\" seems to be found in the name of the Garonne (\"Garunna\" 1st century; \"Garonna\" 4th century). However it is possible to see a pre-Celtic suffix \"-ona\" in the name of the Charente (\"Karantona\" in 875) or the Charentonne (\"Carentona\" in 1050).\n\nIt could also be an augmentative Gascon from the original Latin radical \"Baia-\" with the suffix \"-ona' in the sense of \"vast expanse of water\" or a name derived from the Basque \"bai\" meaning \"river\" and \"ona\" meaning \"good\", hence \"good river\".\n\nThe proposal by Eugene Goyheneche repeated by Manex Goyhenetche and supported by Jean-Baptiste Orpustan is \"bai una\", \"the place of the river\" or \"bai ona\" \"hill by the river\"—\"Ibai\" means \"river\" in Basque and \"muinoa\" means \"hill\".\n\n\"It has perhaps been lost from sight that many urban place names in France, from north to south, came from the element \"Bay-\" or \"Bayon-\" such as: Bayons, Bayonville, Bayonvillers and pose the unusual problem of whether they are Basque or Gascon\"\n\nadds Pierre Hourmat. However, the most ancient form of Bayonne: \"Baiona\", clearly indicates a feminine or a theme of \"-a\" whereas this is not the case for Béon or Bayon. In addition, the \"Bayon-\" in Bayonville or Bayonvillers in northern France is clearly the personal Germanic name \"Baio\".\n\nThe names of the Basque province of Labourd and the locality of Bayonne have been attested from an early period with the place name \"Bayonne\" appearing in the Latin form \"Lapurdum\" after a period during which the two names could in turn designate a Viscounty or Bishopric.\n\n\"Labourd\" and \"Bayonne\" were synonymous and used interchangeably until the 12th century before being differentiated: Labord for the province and Bayonne for the city. The attribution of Bayonne as \"Civitas Boatium\", a place mentioned in the Antonine Itinerary and by Paul Raymond in his 1863 dictionary, has been abandoned. The city of the \"Boïates\" may possibly be La Teste-de-Buch but is certainly not Bayonne.\n\nThe following table details the origins of Labord, Bayonne, and other names in the commune.\n\nSources:\n\nOrigins:\n\nIn the absence of accurate objective data there is some credence to the probable existence of a fishing village on the site in a period prior to ancient times. Numerous traces of human occupation have been found in the Bayonne region from the Middle Paleolithic especially in the discoveries at Saint-Pierre-d'Irube, a neighbouring locality. On the other hand, the presence of a mound about high has been detected in the current Cathedral Quarter overlooking the Nive which formed a natural protection and a usable port on the left bank of the Nive. At the time the mound was surrounded north and west by the Adour swamps. At its foot lies the famous \"Bayonne Sea\"—the junction of the two rivers—which may have been about wide between Saint-Esprit and the Grand Bayonne and totally covered the current location of Bourg-Neuf (in the district of Petit Bayonne). To the south the last bend of the Nive widens near the Saint-Léon hills. Despite this, the narrowing of the Adour valley allows easier crossing than anywhere else along the entire length of the estuary.\n\nIn conclusion, the strategic importance of this height was so obvious it must be presumed that it has always been inhabited.\n\nThe oldest documented human occupation site is located on a hill overlooking the Nive and its confluence with the Adour.\n\nIn the 1st century AD, during the Roman occupation, Bayonne already seems to have been of some importance since the Romans surrounded the city with a wall to keep out the Tarbelli, Aquitani, or the proto-Basque who then occupied a territory that extended south of modern-day Landes, to the modern French Basque country, the Chalosse, the valleys of the Adour, the mountain streams of Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques, and to the Gave d'Oloron.\n\nThe archaeological discoveries of October and November 1995 provided a shred of evidence to support this projection. In the four layers of sub-soil along the foundation of the Gothic cathedral (in the \"apse of the cathedral\" area) a 2-metre depth was found of old objects from the end of the 1st century—in particular sigillated Gallic ceramics from Montans imitating Italian styles, thin-walled bowls, and fragments of amphorae. In the \"southern sector\" near the cloister door there were objects from the second half of the 1st century as well as coins from the first half of the 3rd century.\n\nA very high probability of human presence, not solely military, seems to provisionally confirm the occupation of the site at least around the 3rd century.\n\nA Roman castrum dating to the end of the 4th century has been proven as a fortified place of Novempopulania. Named \"Lapurdum\", the name became the name of the province of \"Labourd\". According to Eugene Goyheneche the name \"Baiona\" designated the city, the port, and the cathedral while that of \"Lapurdum\" was only a territorial designation. This Roman settlement was strategic as it allowed the monitoring of the trans-Pyrenean roads and of local people rebellious to the Roman power. The construction covered 6 to 10 hectares according to several authors. \n\nThe geographical location of the locality at the crossroads of a river system oriented from east to west and the road network connecting Europe to the Iberian Peninsula from north to south predisposed the site to the double role of fortress and port. The city, after being Roman, alternated between the Vascones and the English for three centuries from the 12th to the 15th century.\n\nThe Romans left the city in the 4th century and the Basques, who had always been present, dominated the former Novempopulania province between the Garonne, the Ocean, and the Pyrénées. Novempopulania was renamed Vasconia and then Gascony after a Germanic deformation (resulting from the Visigoth and Frankish invasions). Basquisation of the plains region was too weak against the advance of romanization. From the mixture between the Basque and Latin language Gascon was created.\n\nDocumentation on Bayonne for the period from the High Middle Ages are virtually nonexistent. with the exception of two Norman intrusions: one questionable in 844 and a second attested in 892.\n\nWhen Labourd was created in 1023 Bayonne was the capital and the Viscount resided there. The history of Bayonne proper started in 1056 when Raymond II the Younger, Bishop of Bazas, had the mission to build the Church of Bayonne\n\nThe construction was under the authority of Raymond III of Martres, Bishop of Bayonne from 1122 to 1125, combined with Viscount Bertrand for the Romanesque cathedral, the rear of which can still be seen today, and the first wooden bridge across the Adour extending the Mayou bridge over the Nive, which inaugurated the heyday of Bayonne. From 1120 new districts were created under population pressure. The development of areas between the old Roman city of Grand Bayonne and the Nive also developed during this period, then between the Nive and the Adour at the place that became Petit Bayonne. A Jacobin Convent was located there in 1225 then that of the Cordeliers in 1247. Construction of and modifications to the defences of the city also developed to protect the new districts.\n\nIn 1130 the King of Aragon Alfonso the Battler besieged the city without success. Bayonne came under English rule when Eleanor of Aquitaine married Henry II of England in 1152. This alliance gave Bayonne many commercial privileges. The Bayonnaises became carriers of Bordeaux wines and other south-western products like resin, ham, and woad to England. Bayonne was then an important military base. In 1177 King Richard separated the Viscounty of Labourd whose capital then became Ustaritz. Like many cities at the time, in 1215 Bayonne obtained the award of a municipal charter and was emancipated from feudal powers.\n\nThe official publication in 1273 of a Coutume unique to the city, remained in force for five centuries until the separation of Bayonne from Labourd. \n\nBayonnaise industry at that time was dominated by shipbuilding: wood (oak, beech, chestnut from the Pyrenees, and pine from Landes) being overabundant. There was also maritime activity in providing crews for whaling, commercial marine or, and it was often so at a time when it was easy to turn any merchant ship into a warship, the English Royal Navy. \n\nJean de Dunois - a former companion at arms of Joan of Arc—captured the city on 20 August 1451 and annexed it to the Crown \"without making too many victims\", but at the cost of a war indemnity of 40,000 gold Écus payable in a year,—thanks to the opportunism of the bishop who claimed to have seen \"a large white cross surmounted by a crown which turns into a fleur-de-lis in the sky\" to dissuade Bayonne from fighting against the royal troops. \n\nThe city continued to be fortified by the kings of France to protect it from danger from the Spanish border. In 1454 Charles VII created a separate judicial district: the \"Seneschal of Lannes\" a \"single subdivision of Guyenne during the English period\" which had jurisdiction over a wide area including Bayonne, Dax and Saint-Sever and which exercised civil justice, criminal jurisdiction within the competence of the district councilors. Over time, the \"Seneschal of the Sword\" which was at Dax lost any role other than protocol and Bayonne, along with Dax and Saint-Sever, became the de facto seat of a separate Seneschal under the authority of a \"lieutenant-general of the Seneschal\".\n\nIn May 1462 King Louis XI authorized the holding of two annual fairs by letters patent after signing the Treaty of Bayonne after which it was confirmed by the coutoumes of the inhabitants in July 1472 following the death of Charles de Valois, Duke de Berry, the king's brother.\n\nAt the time the Spanish Inquisition raged in the Iberian Peninsula Jews left Spain, and especially Portugal, then settled in Saint-Esprit. They brought with them chocolate and the recipe for its preparation. The golden age of the city ended in the 15th century with the loss of trade with England and the silting of the port of Bayonne created by the movement of the course of the Adour to the north.\n\nAt the beginning of the 16th century Labourd saw the emergence of the plague. Its path can be tracked by reading the \"Registers\". In July 1515 the city of Bayonne was \"prohibited to welcome people from plague-stricken places\" and on 21 October, \"we inhibit and prohibit all peasants and residents of this city [...] to go Parish Bidart [...] because of the contagion of the plague\". On 11 April 1518 the plague raged in Saint-Jean-de-Luz and the city of Bayonne \"inhibited and prohibited for all peasants and city inhabitants and other foreigners to maintain relationships at the location and Parish of Saint-Jean-de-Luz where people have died of the plague\". On 11 November 1518 plague was present in Bayonne to the point that in 1519 the city council moved to the district of Brindos (Berindos at the time) in Anglet.\n\nIn 1523 Marshal Odet of Foix, Viscount of Lautrec resisted the Spaniards under Philibert of Chalon in the service of Charles V and lifted the siege of Bayonne. It was at Château-Vieux that the ransom demand for the release of Francis I, taken prisoner after his defeat at the Battle of Pavia, was gathered. \n\nThe meeting in 1565 between Catherine de Medici and the envoy of Philip II: the Duke of Alba, is known as the \"Interview of Bayonne\". At the time that Catholics and Protestants tore each other apart in parts of the kingdom of France, Bayonne seemed relatively untouched by these troubles. An iron fist from the city leaders did not appear to be unknown. In fact they never hesitated to use violence and criminal sanctions for keeping order in the name of the \"public good\". Two brothers, Saubat and Johannes Sorhaindo who were both lieutenants of the mayor of Bayonne in the second half of the 16th century, perfectly embody this period. They often wavered between Catholicism and Protestantism but always wanted to ensure the unity and prestige of the city.\n\nIn the 16th century the king's engineers, under the direction of Louis de Foix, were dispatched to rearrange the course of the Adour by creating an estuary to maintain the river bed. The river discharged in the right place to the Ocean on 28 October 1578.} The port of Bayonne then attained a greater level of activity. Fishing for cod and whale ensured the wealth of fishermen and shipowners.\n\nFrom 1611 to 1612 the college Principal of Bayonne was a man of 26 years old with a future: Cornelius Jansen known as \"Jansénius\", the future Bishop of Ypres. Bayonne became the birthplace of Jansenism, an austere science which strongly disrupted the monarchy of Louis XIV.\n\nDuring the sporadic conflicts that troubled the French countryside from the mid 17th century, Bayonne peasants were short of powder and projectiles. They attached the long hunting knives in the barrels of their muskets and that way they fashioned makeshift spears later called \"bayonets\". In that same century, Vauban was charged by Louis XIV to fortify the city. He added a citadel built on a hill overlooking the district of \"San Espirit Cap deou do Punt\".\n\nActivity in Bayonne peaked in the 18th century. The Chamber of Commerce was founded in 1726. Trade with Spain, the Netherlands, the Antilles, the cod fishery off the shores of Newfoundland, and construction sites maintained a high level of activity in the port.\n\nIn 1792 the district of Saint-Esprit (that revolutionaries renamed \"Port-de-la-Montagne\") located on the right bank of the Adour, was separated from the city and renamed \"Jean-Jacques Rousseau\". It was reunited with Bayonne on 1 June 1857. For 65 years the autonomous commune was part of the department of Landes.\n\nIn 1808 at the Château of Marracq the act of abdication of the Spanish king Charles IV in favour of Napoleon was signed under the \"friendly pressure\" of the Emperor. In the process the Bayonne Statute was initialed as the first Spanish constitution.\n\nAlso in 1808 the French Empire imposed on the Duchy of Warsaw the Convention of Bayonne to buy from France the debts owed to it by Prussia. The debt, amounting to more than 43 million francs in gold, was bought at a discounted rate of 21 million francs. However, although the duchy made its payments in installments to France over a four-year period, Prussia was unable to pay it (due to a very large indemnity it owed to France resulting from Treaties of Tilsit), causing the Polish economy to suffer heavily.\n\nTrade was the wealth of the city in the 18th century but suffered greatly in the 19th century, severely sanctioned by conflict with Spain, its historic trading partner in the region. The Siege of Bayonne marked the end of the period with the surrender of the Napoleonic troops of Marshal Jean-de-Dieu Soult who were defeated by the coalition led by Wellington on 5 May 1814.\n\nIn 1854 the railway arrived from Paris bringing many tourists eager to enjoy the beaches of Biarritz. Bayonne turned instead to the steel industry with the forges of the Adour. The Port took on an industrial look but its slow decline seemed inexorable in the 19th century. The discovery of the Lacq gas field restored a certain dynamism.\n\nThe Treaty of Bayonne was concluded on 2 December 1856. It overcame the disputes in fixing the Franco-Spanish border in the area extending from the mouth of the Bidassoa to the border between Navarre and Aragon.\n\nThe city built three light railway lines to connect to Biarritz at the beginning of the 20th century. The most direct line, that of the \"Tramway Bayonne-Lycée–Biarritz\" was operated from 1888 to 1948. In addition a line further north served Anglet, operated by the \"Chemin de fer Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz\" company from 1877 to 1953. Finally a line following the Adour to its mouth and to the Atlantic Ocean by the bar in Anglet, was operated by \"VFDM réseau basque\" from 1919 to 1948.\n\nOn the morning of 23 December 1933, sub-prefect Anthelme received Gustave Tissier, the director of the \"Crédit Municipal de Bayonne\". He responded well, with some astonishment, to his persistent interview. It did not surprise him to see the man unpacking what became the scam of the century.\n\n\"Tissier, director of the \"Crédit Municipal\", was arrested and imprisoned under suspicion of forgery and misappropriation of public funds. He had issued thousands of false bonds in the name of \"Crédit Municipal\" [...]\"\n\nThis was the beginning of the Stavisky Affair which, together with other scandals and political crises, led to the Paris riots of 6 February 1934.\n\nThe 249th Infantry Regiment, created from the 49th Infantry Regiment, was engaged in operations in the First World War, including action at Chemin des Dames, especially on the plateau of Craonne. 700 Bayonnaises perished in the conflict. A centre for engagement of foreign volunteers was established in August 1914 in Bayonne. Many nationalities were represented, particularly the Spanish, the Portuguese, the Czechs, and the Poles \n\nDuring the Second World War Bayonne was occupied by the 3rd SS Panzer Division Totenkopf from 27 June 1940 to 23 August 1944.\n\nOn 5 April 1942 the Allies made a landing attempt in Bayonne but after a barge penetrated the Adour with great difficulty, the operation was canceled.\n\nOn 21 August 1944, after blowing up twenty ships in port, German troops withdrew. On the 22nd a final convoy of five vehicles passed through the city. It transported Gestapo Customs agents and some elements of the \"Feldgendarmerie\". One or more Germans opened fire with machine guns killing three people. On the 23rd there was an informal and immediate installation of a \"special municipal delegation\" by the young deputy prefect Guy Lamassoure representing the Provisional Government of the French Republic which had been established in Algiers since 27 June.\n\nThe Gramont family provided captains and governors in Bayonne from 1472 to 1789 as well as mayors, a post which became hereditary from 28 January 1590 by concession of Henry IV to Antoine II of Gramont. From the 15th century they resided in the Château Neuf then in the Château-Vieux from the end of the 16th century: \n\n\nList of Successive Mayors\n\n(Not all data is known)\n\nAs per the Decree of 22 December 1789 Bayonne was part of two cantons: Bayonne-North-east, which includes part of Bayonne commune plus Boucau, Saint-Pierre-d'Irube, Lahonce, Mouguerre, and Urcuit; and Bayonne Northwest which consisted of the rest of Bayonne commune plus Anglet, Arcangues, and Bassussarry.\n\nIn a first revision of cantons in 1973 three cantons were created from the same total; geographic area: Bayonne North, Bayonne East, and Bayonne West. A further reconfiguration in 1982 focused primarily on Bayonne and, apart from Bayonne North Canton, which also includes Boucau, the cantons of Bayonne East and Bayonne West did not change.\n\nStarting from the French departmental elections, 2015 which took place on 22 and 29 March, a new division took effect following the decree of 25 February 2014 Once again three cantons centred on Bayonne are defined: Bayonne-1—with part of Anglet; Bayonne-2—which includes Boucau; and Bayonne-3 now define the cantonal territorial division of the area.\n\nBayonne is the seat of many courts for the region. It falls under the jurisdiction of the \"Tribunal d'instance\" (District court) of Bayonne, the \"Tribunal de grande instance\" (High Court) of Bayonne, the \"Cour d'appel\" (Court of Appeal) of Pau, the \"Tribunal pour enfants\" (Juvenile court) of Bayonne, the \"Conseil de prud'hommes\" (Labour Court) of Bayonne, the \"Tribunal de commerce\" (Commercial Court) of Bayonne, the \"Tribunal administratif\" (Administrative tribunal) of Pau, and the \"Cour administrative d'appel\" (Administrative Court of Appeal) of Bordeaux.\n\nThe commune has a police station, a Departmental Gendarmerie, an Autonomous Territorial Brigade of the district gendarmerie, squadron 24/2 of Mobile Gendarmerie and a Tax collection office.\n\nThe commune is part of twelve inter-communal structures of which eleven are based in the commune:\n\n\nThe city of Bayonne is part of the \"Agglomeration Côte Basque-Adour\" which also includes Anglet, Biarritz, Bidart and Boucau. The statutory powers of the structure extend to economic development—including higher education and research—housing and urban planning, public transport—through Transdev—alternative and the collection and recovery waste collection and management of rain and coastal waters, the sustainable development, interregional cooperation and finally 106.\n\nIn addition Bayonne is part of the Basque Bayonne-San Sebastián Eurocity which is a European economic interest grouping (EEIG) established in 1993 based in San Sebastián.\n\nBayonne has twinning associations with:\nIn 2012 the commune had 45,855 inhabitants. The evolution of the number of inhabitants is known from the population censuses conducted in the commune since 1793. From the 21st century, a census of communes with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants is held every five years, unlike larger communes that have a sample survey every year.\n\nBayonne commune is attached to the Academy of Bordeaux. It has an information and guidance center (CIO).\n\nOn 14 December 2015 Bayonne had 10 kindergartens, 22 elementary or primary schools (12 public and 10 private primary schools including two ikastolas). 2 public colleges (Albert Camus and Marracq colleges), 5 private colleges (La Salle Saint-Bernard, Saint Joseph, Saint-Amand, Notre-Dame and Largenté) which meet the criteria of the first cycle of second degree studies. For the second cycle Bayonne has 3 public high schools (René-Cassin school (general education), the Louis de Foix school (general, technological and vocational education), and the Paul Bert vocational school), 4 private high schools (Saint-Louis Villa Pia (general education), Largenté, Bernat Etxepare (general and technological), and Le Guichot vocational school).\n\nThere are also the Maurice Ravel Conservatory of Music, Dance, and Dramatic Art and the art school of the urban community of Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz.\n\nFor 550 years every holy Thursday, Friday and Saturday the \"Foire au Jambon\" (Ham festival) is held to mark the beginning of the season. \n\nAn annual summer festival has been held in the commune since 1932 for five days organized around parades, bulls races, fireworks, and music in the Basque and Gascon tradition. These festivals have become the most important festive events in France in terms of attendance.\n\nBayonne has the oldest French bullfighting tradition. A bylaw regulating the \"encierro\" is dated 1283: cows, oxen and bulls are released each year in the streets of Petit Bayonne during the summer festivals. The current arena, opened in 1893, is the largest in South-west France with more than 10,000 seats. A dozen bullfights are held each year, attracting the biggest names in bullfighting. Throughout summer several \"novilladas\" also take place. The city is a member of the \"Union of French bullfighting cities\".\n\nBayonne is the focus of much of the hospital services for the agglomeration of Bayonne and the southern Landes. In this area all inhabitants are less than 35 km from a hospital offering medical, obstetrical, surgical, or psychiatric care. The hospitals for all the Basque Coast are mainly established in Bayonne (the main site of Saint-Léon and Cam-de-Prats) and also in Saint-Jean-de-Luz which has several clinics.\n\n\nBayonne is in the Diocese of Bayonne, Lescar and Oloron, with a Suffragan bishop since 2002 under the Archdiocese of Bordeaux. Monseigneur Marc Aillet has been the bishop of this diocese since 15 October 2008. The diocese is located in Bayonne in the Place Monseigneur-Vansteenberghe.\n\nBesides Bayonne Cathedral in Grand Bayonne, Bayonne has Saint-Esprit, Saint Andrew (Rue des Lisses), Arènes (Avenue of the Czech Legion), Saint-Étienne, and Saint-Amand (Avenue Marechal Soult) churches.\n\nThe \"Carmel of Bayonne\", located in the Marracq district, has had a community of Carmelite nuns since 1858.\n\nThe \"Way of Baztan\" (also \"ruta del Baztan\" or \"camino Baztanés\") is a way on the pilgrimage of Camino de Santiago which crosses the Pyrenees further west by the lowest pass (by the \"Col de Belate\", 847 m). It is the ancient road used by pilgrims descending to Bayonne then either along the coast on the \"Way of Soulac\" or because they landed there from England, for example, to join the French Way as soon as possible in Pamplona. The \"Way of Bayonne\" joins the French Way further downstream at Burgos.\n\nThe synagogue was built in 1837 in the Saint-Esprit district north of the town. The Jewish community of Bayonne is old—it consists of different groups of fugitives from Navarre and Portugal who established at SAint-Esprit-lès-Bayonne after the expulsion of Jews from Spain in 1492 and Portugal in 1496. In 1846 the Central Consistory moved to Saint-Esprit which was integrated with Bayonne in 1857.\n\nThe mosque is located in Rue Joseph-Latxague. It is the seat of the cultural association of Muslims in the Basque Coast.\n\nThe Protestant church is located at the corner of Rue Albert-I st and Rue du Temple A gospel church is located in the Saint-Esprit districtit where there is also a church belonging to the Gypsy Evangelical Church of the Protestant Federation of France.\n\nIn 2011, the median household income tax was €22,605, placing Bayonne 28,406th place among the 31,886 communes with more than 49 households in metropolitan France.\n\nIn 2011 47.8% of households were not taxable.\n\nIn 2011 the population aged from 15 to 64 years was 29,007 persons of which 70.8% were employable, 60.3% in employment and 10.5% unemployed. While there were 30,012 jobs in the employment area, against 29,220 in 2006, and the number of employed workers residing in the employment area was 17,667, the indicator of job concentration is 169.9% which means that the employment area offers nearly two jobs to for every available worker.\n\nBayonne is the economic capital of the agglomeration of Bayonne and southern Landes. The table below details the number of companies located in Bayonne according to their industry:\n\nThe table below shows employees by business establishments in terms of numbers:\n\nThe following comments apply to the two previous tables:\n\nIn 2013 549 new establishments were created in Bayonne including 406 Sole proprietorships. \n\nBayonne has few such industries, as indicated in the previous tables. There is \"Plastitube\" specializing in plastic packaging (190 employees). The Izarra liqueur company set up a distillery in 1912 at Quai Amiral-Bergeret and has long symbolized the economic wealth of Bayonne. Industrial activities are concentrated in the neighbouring communes of Boucau, Tarnos (Turbomeca), Mouguerre, and Anglet.\n\nBayonne is known for its fine chocolates, produced in the town for 500 years, and Bayonne ham, a cured ham seasoned with peppers from nearby Espelette. Izarra, the liqueur made in bright green or yellow colours, is distilled locally. It is said by some that Bayonne is the birthplace of mayonnaise, supposedly a corruption of \"Bayonnaise\", the French adjective describing the city's people and produce. Now bayonnaise can refer to a particular mayonnaise flavoured with the Espelette chillis.\n\nBayonne is now the centre of certain craft industries that were once widespread, including the manufacture of \"makilas\", traditional Basque walking-sticks. The Fabrique Alza just outside the city is known for its \"palas\", bats used in \"pelota\", the traditional Basque sport.\n\nThe active tertiary sector includes some large retail chains such as those detailed by geographer Roger Brunet: BUT (240 staff), Carrefour (150 staff), E.Leclerc (150 staff), Leroy Merlin (130 staff), and Galeries Lafayette (120 employees). Banks, cleaning companies (Onet, 170 employees), and security (Brink's, 100 employees) are also major employers in the commune, as is urban transport which employs nearly 200 staff. Five health clinics, providing a total of more than 500 beds, each employ 120 to 170 staff.\n\nThe port of Bayonne is located at the mouth of the Adour, downstream of the city. It also occupies part of communes of Anglet and Boucau in Pyrenees-Atlantiques and Tarnos in Landes. It benefits greatly from the natural gas field of Lacq to which it is connected by pipeline. This is the 9th largest French port for trade with an annual traffic of about 4.2 million tonnes of which 2.8 is export. It is also the largest French port for export of maize. It is the property of the Aquitaine region who manage and control the site. Metallurgical products movement are more than one million tons per year and maize exports to Spain vary between 800,000 and 1 million tons. The port also receives refined oil products from the Total oil refinery at Donges (800,000 tons per year). Fertilizers are a traffic of 500,000 tons per year and sulphur from Lacq, albeit in sharp decline, is 400,000 tons.\n\nThe port also receives Ford and General Motors vehicles from Spain and Portugal and wood both tropical and from Landes.\n\nDue to its proximity to the ocean and the foothills of the Pyrenees as well as its historic heritage, Bayonne has developed important activities related to tourism.\n\nOn 31 December 2012 there were 15 hotels in the city offering more than 800 rooms to visitors, but there were no camp sites. The tourist infrastructure in the surrounding urban area of Bayonne complements the local supply with around 5800 rooms spread over nearly 200 hotels and 86 campsites offering over 14,000 beds.\n\nThe Nive divides Bayonne into Grand Bayonne and Petit Bayonne with five bridges between the two, both quarters still being backed by Vauban's walls. The houses lining the Nive are examples of Basque architecture, with half-timbering and shutters in the national colours of red and green. The much wider Adour is to the north. The Pont Saint-Esprit connects Petit Bayonne with the Quartier Saint-Esprit across the Adour, where the massive Citadelle and the railway station are located. Grand Bayonne is the commercial and civic hub, with small pedestrianised streets packed with shops, plus the cathedral and Hôtel de Ville.\n\nThe Cathédrale Sainte-Marie is an imposing, elegant Gothic building, rising over the houses, glimpsed along the narrow streets. It was constructed in the 12th and 13th centuries. The south tower was completed in the 16th century but the cathedral was only completed in the 19th century with the north tower. The cathedral is noted for its charming cloisters. There are other details and sculptures of note, although much was destroyed in the Revolution.\n\nNearby is the Château Vieux, some of which dates back to the 12th century, where the governors of the city were based, including the English Black Prince.\nThe Musée Basque is the finest ethnographic museum of the entire Basque Country. It opened in 1922 but has been closed for a decade recently for refurbishment. It now has special exhibitions on Basque agriculture, seafaring and \"pelota\", handicrafts and Basque history and way of life.\n\nThe Musée Bonnat began with a large collection bequeathed by the local-born painter Léon Bonnat. The museum is one of the best galleries in south west France and has paintings by Edgar Degas, El Greco, Sandro Botticelli, and Francisco Goya, among others.\n\nAt the back of Petit Bayonne is the Château Neuf, among the ramparts. Now an exhibition space, it was started by the newly arrived French in 1460 to control the city. The walls nearby have been opened to visitors. They are important for plant life now and Bayonne's botanic gardens adjoin the walls on both sides of the Nive.\n\nThe area across the Adour is largely residential and industrial, with much demolished to make way for the railway. The Saint-Esprit church was part of a bigger complex built by Louis XI to care for pilgrims to Santiago de Compostela. It is home to a wooden \"Flight into Egypt\" sculpture.\n\nOverlooking the quarter is Vauban's 1680 Citadelle. The soldiers of Wellington's army who died besieging the citadelle in 1813 are buried in the nearby English Cemetery, visited by Queen Victoria and other British dignitaries when staying in Biarritz.\n\nThe distillery of the famous local liqueur Izarra is located on the northern bank of the Adour and is open to visitors.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "4742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4742", "title": "Bubblegum Crisis", "text": "Bubblegum Crisis\n\nThe series involves the adventures of the Knight Sabers, an all-female group of mercenaries who don powered exoskeletons and fight various problems, most frequently rogue robots. The success of the series spawned several sequel series.\n\nThe series begins in late 2032, seven years after the Second Great Kanto earthquake has split Tokyo geographically and culturally in two. During the first episode, disparities in wealth are shown to be more pronounced than in previous periods in post-war Japan. The main antagonist is Genom, a megacorporation with immense power and global influence. Its main product are boomers—artificial cybernetic life forms that are usually in the form of humans, with most of their bodies being machine; also known as \"cyberoids\". While Boomers are intended to serve mankind, they become deadly instruments in the hands of ruthless individuals. The AD Police are tasked to deal with Boomer-related crimes. One of the series' themes is the inability of the department to deal with threats due to political infighting, red tape, and an insufficient budget.\n\nThe setting displays strong influences from the movies \"Blade Runner\" and \"Streets of Fire\". The opening sequence of episode 1 is modeled on the opening sequence of \"Streets of Fire\". The humanoid robots known as \"boomers\" in the series also resemble Terminators cyborgs from the \"Terminator\" film.\n\nSuzuki explained in a 1993 \"Animerica\" interview the meaning behind the cryptic title: \"We originally named the series 'bubblegum' to reflect a world in crisis, like a chewing-gum bubble that's about to burst.\"\n\nThe series started with Toshimichi Suzuki intention to remake the 1982 film Techno Police 21C. However, he met Junji Fujita and the two discussed ideas, and decided to collaborate on what later became Bubblegum Crisis. Kenichi Sonoda acted as character designer, and designed the four female leads. Masami Obari created the mechanical designs. Obari would also go on to direct episode 5 and 6.\n\nThe OVA series is eight episodes long but was originally slated to run for 13 episodes.\nDue to legal problems between Artmic and Youmex, who jointly held the rights to the series, the series was discontinued prematurely.\n\nIn North America, AnimEigo first released Bubblegum Crisis to VHS and Laserdisc in 1991 in Japanese with English subtitles. The series is notable in that it was one of the few early anime series that were brought over from Japan unedited and subtitled in English. While anime has become much more popular in the years since, in 1991, it was still mostly unknown as a storytelling medium in North America. Bubblegum Crisis was aired in the US when it first aired on PBS' San Jose affiliate KTEH in the 1990s, and STARZ!'s Action Channel in 2000.\n\nAn English dub of the series was produced beginning in 1994 by AnimEigo through Southwynde Studios in Wilmington, NC, and released to VHS and Laserdisc beginning that year. A digitally-remastered compilation, featuring bilingual audio tracks and production extras, was released on DVD in 2004 by AnimEigo. The company later successfully crowdfunded a collector's edition Blu-ray release through Kickstarter in November 2013.\n\nThere are 8 soundtrack releases (one per OVA), as well as numerous \"vocal\" albums which feature songs \"inspired by\" the series as well as many drawn directly from it.\n\nMasaki Kajishima and Hiroki Hayashi, who both worked on the \"Bubblegum Crisis\" OAVs, cite the show as being the inspiration for their harem series \"Tenchi Muyo! Ryo-Ohki\". In an interview with AIC, Hayashi described \"Bubblegum Crisis\" as \"a pretty gloomy anime. Serious fighting, complicated human relationships, and dark Mega Tokyo.\" They thought it would be fun to create some comedy episodes with ideas like the girls going to the hot springs, but it was rejected by the sponsors. He also said that there was a trend to have a bunch of characters of one gender and a single one of the other gender, and asked what if Mackey (Sylia's brother) was a main character, reversing the \"Bubblegum\" scenario. This idea then became the basis for Tenchi. Hayashi said that Mackey is \"sort of\" the original model for Tenchi.\n\nKevin Siembieda's becoming aware of \"Boomers\" being already in use in this caused him to changed his planned name for the Rifts RPG which he had named after the |Boom Gun\"-wielding power armor which was also renamed to \"Glitter Boy\".\n\nThe success of the series spawned several sequel series. The first of them was the three-part OVA . After the split between Artmic and Youmex, Artmic proceeded to make a sequel on their own, \"Bubblegum Crash\", which ran three OVA episodes and is conjectured that it was a shortened version of how \"Crisis\" was to end. Youmex promptly sued Artmic, cutting \"Crash\" short and tying the entire franchise up in legal issues for the next several years.\n\nIt is set in 2034, and the Knight Sabers seem to be finished; each of its members - except Nene - have seemingly drifted off to pursue their own goals. But at the same time, parts of a unique artificial intelligence are stolen by several villains acting under the orders of a mysterious voice. Unexpectedly, Sylia resurfaces and prepares her teammates for battle. And as a gigantic machine drills its way to Mega Tokyo's main nuclear power plant, they meet again with an old and deadly enemy.\n\n\nIn 1993, it appeared on \"Scramble Wars\", a crossover event between \"Bubblegum Crisis\", \"Gall Force\", \"Genesis Survivor Gaiarth\", \"AD Police\" and \"Riding Bean\".\n\n\n\nIn Japan, a number of comic books were produced that featured characters and storylines based in the same universe. Some were very much thematically linked to the OVA series, while others were \"one-shots\" or comedy features. A number of artists participated in the creation of these comics, including Kenichi Sonoda, who had produced the original Knight Saber character designs. A North American comic based in the Bubblegum Crisis Universe was published in English by Dark Horse Comics.\n\n\n\nIn May 2009 it was announced that a live-action movie of \"Bubblegum Crisis\" was in the early stages of production. A production agreement was signed at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival. The film was expected to be released in late 2012 with a budget of 30 million. The production staff was said to have consulted with the original anime's staff members, Shinji Aramaki and Kenichi Sonoda, to help maintain consistency with the world of the original. However, no further developments have been announced.\n\n"}
{"id": "4745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4745", "title": "Black people", "text": "Black people\n\nBlack people is a term used in certain countries, often in socially based systems of racial classification or of ethnicity, to describe persons who are perceived to be dark-skinned compared to other given populations. As such, the meaning of the expression varies widely both between and within societies, and depends significantly on context. For many other individuals, communities and countries, \"black\" is also perceived as a derogatory, outdated, reductive or otherwise unrepresentative label, and as a result is neither used nor defined.\n\nDifferent societies apply differing criteria regarding who is classified as \"black\", and these social constructs have also changed over time. In a number of countries, societal variables affect classification as much as skin color, and the social criteria for \"blackness\" vary. For example, in North America the term \"black people\" is not necessarily an indicator of skin color or ethnic origin, but is instead a socially based racial classification related to being African American, with a family history typically associated with institutionalized slavery. In the United Kingdom, \"black\" was historically equivalent with \"person of color\", a general term for non-European peoples. In South Africa and Latin America, mixed-race people are generally not classified as \"black\". In other regions such as Australasia, settlers applied the term \"black\" or it was used by local populations with different histories and ancestral backgrounds.\n\nThe Romans interacted with and later conquered parts of Mauretania, an early state that covered modern Morocco, western Algeria, and the Spanish cities Ceuta and Melilla during the classical period. The people of the region were noted in Classical literature as \"Mauri\", which was subsequently rendered as Moors in English.\n\nNumerous communities of dark-skinned peoples are present in North Africa, some dating from prehistoric communities. Others are descendants of the historical Trans-Saharan trade in peoples and/or, and after the Arab invasions of North Africa in the 7th century, descendants of slaves from the Arab Slave Trade in North Africa.\n\nIn the 18th century, the Moroccan Sultan Moulay Ismail \"the Bloodthirsty\" (1672–1727) raised a corps of 150,000 black slaves, called his Black Guard, who coerced the country into submission.\n\nAccording to Dr. Carlos Moore, resident scholar at Brazil's University of the State of Bahia, in the 21st century Afro-multiracials in the Arab world, including Arabs in North Africa, self-identify in ways that resemble multi-racials in Latin America. He claims that black-looking Arabs, much like black-looking Latin Americans, consider themselves white because they have some distant white ancestry.\n\nEgyptian President Anwar Sadat had a mother who was a dark-skinned Nubian Sudanese woman and a father who was a lighter-skinned Egyptian. In response to an advertisement for an acting position, as a young man he said, \"I am not white but I am not exactly black either. My blackness is tending to reddish\".\nDue to the patriarchal nature of Arab society, Arab men, including during the slave trade in North Africa, enslaved more black women than men. They used more black female slaves in domestic service and agriculture than males. The men interpreted the Qur'an to permit sexual relations between a male master and his female slave outside of marriage (see Ma malakat aymanukum and sex), leading to many mixed-race children. When an enslaved woman became pregnant with her Arab master's child, she was considered as \"umm walad\" or \"mother of a child\", a status that granted her privileged rights. The child was given rights of inheritance to the father's property, so mixed-race children could share in any wealth of the father. Because the society was patrilineal, the children took their fathers' social status at birth and were born free.\n\nSome succeeded their fathers as rulers, such as Sultan Ahmad al-Mansur, who ruled Morocco from 1578 to 1608. He was not technically considered as a mixed-race child of a slave; his mother was Fulani and a concubine of his father. Such tolerance for black persons, even when technically \"free\", was not so common in Morocco. The long association of sub-Saharan peoples as slaves is shown in the term \"abd\" () (meaning \"slave\"); it is still frequently used in the Arabic-speaking world as a term for black people.\n\nIn early 1991, non-Arabs of the Zaghawa tribe of Sudan attested that they were victims of an intensifying Arab apartheid campaign, segregating Arabs and non-Arabs (specifically, people of Nilotic descent). Sudanese Arabs, who controlled the government, were widely referred to as practicing apartheid against Sudan's non-Arab citizens. The government was accused of \"deftly manipulat(ing) Arab solidarity\" to carry out policies of apartheid and ethnic cleansing.\n\nAmerican University economist George Ayittey accused the Arab government of Sudan of practicing acts of racism against black citizens. According to Ayittey, \"In Sudan... the Arabs monopolized power and excluded blacks – Arab apartheid.\" Many African commentators joined Ayittey in accusing Sudan of practising Arab apartheid.\n\nAlan Dershowitz described Sudan as an example of a government that \"actually deserve(s)\" the appellation \"apartheid.\" Former Canadian Minister of Justice Irwin Cotler echoed the accusation.\n\nIn the Sahara, the native Tuareg Berber populations kept \"Negro\" slaves. Most of these captives were of Nilotic extraction, and were either purchased by the Tuareg nobles from slave markets in the Western Sudan or taken during raids. Their origin is denoted via the Ahaggar Berber word \"Ibenheren\" (sing. \"Ébenher\"), which alludes to slaves that only speak a Nilo-Saharan language. These slaves were also sometimes known by the borrowed Songhay term \"Bella\".\n\nSimilarly, the Sahrawi autochthones of the Western Sahara observed a class system consisting of high castes and low castes. Outside of these traditional tribal boundaries were \"Negro\" slaves, who were drawn from the surrounding areas.\n\nIn parts of the Horn of Africa, the local Afroasiatic (Hamitic-Semitic) speaking populations have long adhered to a construct similar to that of the Sahara, Nile and Maghreb. In Ethiopia and Somalia, the slave classes mainly consisted of individuals of Nilotic and Bantu origin who were collectively known as \"Shanqella\" and \"Adone\" (both denoting \"Negro\"). These captives and others of analogous morphology were distinguished as \"tsalim barya\" in contrast with the Afroasiatic-speaking nobles or \"saba qayh\" (\"red men\"). The earliest representation of this tradition dates from a seventh or eighth century BC inscription belonging to the Kingdom of Damat.\n\nIn South Africa, the period of colonization resulted in many unions and marriages between European men and Bantu and Khoisan women from various tribes, resulting in mixed-race children. As the European settlers acquired control of territory, they generally pushed the mixed-race and Bantu and Khoisan populations into second-class status. During the first half of the 20th century, the Afrikaaner-dominated government classified the population according to four main racial groups: \"Black\", \"White\", \"Asian\" (mostly Indian), and \"Coloured\". The Coloured group included people of mixed Bantu, Khoisan, and European descent (with some Malay ancestry, especially in the Western Cape). The Coloured definition occupied an intermediary political position between the Black and White definitions in South Africa. It imposed a system of legal racial segregation, a complex of laws known as apartheid.\n\nThe apartheid bureaucracy devised complex (and often arbitrary) criteria in the Population Registration Act of 1945 to determine who belonged in which group. Minor officials administered tests to enforce the classifications. When it was unclear from a person's physical appearance whether the individual should be considered Coloured or Black, the \"pencil test\" was used. A pencil was inserted into a person's hair to determine if the hair was kinky enough to hold the pencil, rather than having it pass through, as it would with smoother hair. If so, the person was classified as Black. Such classifications sometimes divided families.\n\nSandra Laing is a South African woman who was classified as Coloured by authorities during the apartheid era, due to her skin colour and hair texture, although her parents could prove at least three generations of European ancestors. At age 10, she was expelled from her all-white school. The officials' decisions based on her anomalous appearance disrupted her family and adult life. She was the subject of the 2008 biographical dramatic film \"Skin\", which won numerous awards.\n\nDuring the apartheid era, those classed as \"Coloured\" were oppressed and discriminated against. But, they had limited rights and overall had slightly better socioeconomic conditions than those classed as \"Black\". The government required that Blacks and Coloureds live in areas separate from Whites, creating large townships located away from the cities as areas for Blacks.\n\nIn the post-apartheid era, the Constitution of South Africa has declared the country to be a \"Non-racial democracy\". In an effort to redress past injustices, the ANC government has introduced laws in support of affirmative action policies for Blacks; under these they define \"Black\" people to include \"Africans\", \"Coloureds\" and \"Asians\". Some affirmative action policies favor \"Africans\" over \"Coloureds\" in terms of qualifying for certain benefits. Some South Africans categorized as \"African Black\" say that \"Coloureds\" did not suffer as much as they did during apartheid. \"Coloured\" South Africans are known to discuss their dilemma by saying, \"we were not white enough under apartheid, and we are not black enough under the ANC (African National Congress)\".\n\nIn 2008, the High Court in South Africa ruled that Chinese South Africans who were residents during the apartheid era (and their descendants) are to be reclassified as \"Black people,\" solely for the purposes of accessing affirmative action benefits, because they were also \"disadvantaged\" by racial discrimination. Chinese people who arrived in the country after the end of apartheid do not qualify for such benefits.\n\nOther than by appearance, \"Coloureds\" can usually be distinguished from \"Blacks\" by language. Most speak Afrikaans or English as a first language, as opposed to Bantu languages such as Zulu or Xhosa. They also tend to have more European-sounding names than Bantu names.\n\nHistorians estimate that between the advent of Islam in 650CE and the abolition of slavery in the Arabian Peninsula in the mid-20th century, 10 to 18 million Black Africans (known as the Zanj) were enslaved by Arab slave traders and transported to the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries. This number far exceeded the number of slaves who were taken to the Americas. Several factors affected the visibility of descendants of this diaspora in 21st-century Arab societies: The traders shipped more female slaves than males, as there was a demand for them to serve as concubines in harems in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries. Male slaves were castrated in order to serve as harem guards. The death toll of Black African slaves from forced labor was high. The mixed-race children of female slaves and Arab owners were assimilated into the Arab owners' families under the patrilineal kinship system. As a result, few distinctive Afro-Arab communities have survived in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries.\n\nGenetic studies have found significant African female-mediated gene flow in Arab communities in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries, with an average of 38% of maternal lineages in Yemen are of direct African descent, 16% in Oman-Qatar, and 10% in Saudi Arabia-United Arab Emirates.\n\nDistinctive and self-identified black communities have been reported in countries such as Iraq, with a reported 1.2 million black people, and they attest to a history of discrimination. These descendants of the Zanj have sought minority status from the government, which would reserve some seats in Parliament for representatives of their population. According to Alamin M. Mazrui et al., generally in the Arabian Peninsula and neighboring countries, most of those of visible African descent are still classified and identify as Arab, not black.\n\nAbout 150,000 East African and black people live in Israel, amounting to just over 2% of the nation's population. The vast majority of these, some 120,000, are Beta Israel, most of whom are recent immigrants who came during the 1980s and 1990s from Ethiopia. In addition, Israel is home to over 5,000 members of the African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem movement that are descendants of African Americans who emigrated to Israel in the 20th century, and who reside mainly in a distinct neighborhood in the Negev town of Dimona. Unknown numbers of black converts to Judaism reside in Israel, most of them converts from the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States.\n\nAdditionally, there are around 60,000 non-Jewish African immigrants in Israel, some of whom have sought asylum. Most of the migrants are from communities in Sudan and Eritrea, particularly the Niger-Congo-speaking Nuba groups of the southern Nuba Mountains; some are illegal immigrants.\n\nBeginning several centuries ago, during the period of the Ottoman Empire, tens of thousands of Zanj captives were brought by slave traders to plantations and agricultural areas situated between Antalya and Istanbul in present-day Turkey. Some of their descendants remained \"in situ\", and many migrated to larger cities and towns. Other black slaves were transported to Crete, from where they or their descendants later reached the İzmir area through the population exchange between Greece and Turkey in 1923, or indirectly from Ayvalık in pursuit of work.\n\nThe Siddi are an ethnic group inhabiting India and Pakistan whose members are descended from Bantu peoples from Southeast Africa that were brought to the Indian subcontinent as slaves by Arab and Portuguese merchants. Although it is commonly believed locally that \"Siddi\" derives from a word meaning \"black\", the term is actually derived from \"Sayyid\", the title borne by the captains of the Arab vessels that first brought Siddi settlers to the area. In the Makran strip of the Sindh and Balochistan provinces in southwestern Pakistan, these Bantu descendants are known as the Makrani. There was a brief \"Black Power\" movement in Sindh in the 1960s and many Siddi are proud of and celebrate their African ancestry.\n\nThe Negritos are believed to be the first inhabitants of Southeast Asia. Once inhabiting Taiwan, Vietnam, and various other parts of Asia, they are now confined primarily to Thailand, the Malay Archipelago, and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Negrito means \"little black people\" in Spanish (negrito is the Spanish diminutive of negro, i.e., \"little black person\"); it is what the Spaniards called the short-statured, hunter-gatherer autochthones that they encountered in the Philippines. Despite this, Negritos are never referred to as black today, and doing so would cause offense. The term \"Negrito\" itself has come under criticism in countries like Malaysia, where it is now interchangeable with the more acceptable Semang, although this term actually refers to a specific group. The common Thai word for Negritos literally means \"frizzy hair\".\n\nThe term \"Moors\" has been used in Europe in a broader, somewhat derogatory sense to refer to Muslims, especially those of Arab or Berber descent, whether living in North Africa or Iberia. Moors were not a distinct or self-defined people. Medieval and early modern Europeans applied the name to Muslim Arabs, Berbers, Black Africans and Europeans alike.\n\nIsidore of Seville, writing in the 7th century, claimed that the Latin word Maurus was derived from the Greek \"mauron\", μαύρον, which is the Greek word for black. Indeed, by the time Isidore of Seville came to write his \"Etymologies\", the word Maurus or \"Moor\" had become an adjective in Latin, \"for the Greeks call black, mauron\". \"In Isidore’s day, Moors were black by definition…\"\n\nAfro-Spaniards are Spanish nationals of West/Central African descent. They today mainly come from Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Gambia, Mali, Nigeria and Senegal. Additionally, many Afro-Spaniards born in Spain are from the former Spanish colony Equatorial Guinea. Today, there are an estimated 683,000 Afro-Spaniards in Spain.\n\nAccording to the Office for National Statistics, at the 2001 census there were over a million black people in the United Kingdom; 1% of the total population described themselves as \"Black Caribbean\", 0.8% as \"Black African\", and 0.2% as \"Black other\". Britain encouraged the immigration of workers from the Caribbean after World War II; the first symbolic movement was those who came on the ship the \"Empire Windrush\". The preferred official umbrella term is \"black and minority ethnic\" (BME), but sometimes the term \"black\" is used on its own, to express unified opposition to racism, as in the Southall Black Sisters, which started with a mainly British Asian constituency, and the National Black Police Association, which has a membership of \"African, African-Caribbean and Asian origin\".\n\nWhile census collection of ethnic background is illegal in France, it is estimated that there are about 2.5 – 5 million black people residing there.\n\nAfro-Dutch are residents of the Netherlands who are of Black African or Afro-Caribbean ancestry. They tend to be from the former and present Dutch overseas territories of Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao, Sint Maarten and Suriname. The Netherlands also has sizable Cape Verdean and other African communities.\n\nAs African states became independent in the 1960s, the Soviet Union offered many of their citizens the chance to study in Russia. Over a period of 40 years, about 400,000 African students from various countries moved to Russia to pursue higher studies, including many Black Africans. This extended beyond the Soviet Union to many countries of the Eastern bloc.\n\nDue to the slave trade in the Ottoman Empire that had flourished in the Balkans, the coastal town of Ulcinj in Montenegro had its own black community. As a consequence of the slave trade and privateer activity, it is told how until 1878 in Ulcinj 100 black people lived. The Ottoman Army also deployed an estimated 30,000 Black African troops and cavalrymen to its expedition in Hungary during the Austro-Turkish War of 1716–18.\n\nIndigenous Australians have been referred to as \"black people\" in Australia since the early days of European settlement. While originally related to skin colour, the term is used to today to indicate Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander ancestry in general and can refer to people of any skin pigmentation.\n\nBeing identified as either \"black\" or \"white\" in Australia during the 19th and early 20th centuries was critical in one's employment and social prospects. Various state-based Aboriginal Protection Boards were established which had virtually complete control over the lives of Indigenous Australians – where they lived, their employment, marriage, education and included the power to separate children from their parents. Aborigines were not allowed to vote and were often confined to reserves and forced into low paid or effectively slave labour. The social position of mixed-race or \"half-caste\" individuals varied over time. A 1913 report by Sir Baldwin Spencer states that:\nAfter the First World War, however, it became apparent that the number of mixed-race people was growing at a faster rate than the white population, and by 1930 fear of the \"half-caste menace\" undermining the White Australia ideal from within was being taken as a serious concern. Dr. Cecil Cook, the Northern Territory Protector of Natives, noted that:\nThe official policy became one of biological and cultural assimilation: \"Eliminate the full-blood and permit the white admixture to half-castes and eventually the race will become white\". This led to different treatment for \"black\" and \"half-caste\" individuals, with lighter-skinned individuals targeted for removal from their families to be raised as \"white\" people, restricted from speaking their native language and practising traditional customs, a process now known as the Stolen Generation.\nThe second half of the 20th century to the present has seen a gradual shift towards improved human rights for Aboriginal people. In a 1967 referendum over 90% of the Australian population voted to end constitutional discrimination and to include Aborigines in the national census. During this period many Aboriginal activists began to embrace the term \"black\" and use their ancestry as a source of pride. Activist Bob Maza said:\nIn 1978 Aboriginal writer Kevin Gilbert received the National Book Council award for his book \"Living Black: Blacks Talk to Kevin Gilbert\", a collection of Aboriginal people's stories, and in 1998 was awarded (but refused to accept) the Human Rights Award for Literature for \"Inside Black Australia\", a poetry anthology and exhibition of Aboriginal photography. In contrast to previous definitions based solely on the degree of Aboriginal ancestry, in 1990 the Government changed the legal definition of Aboriginal to include any:\n\nThis nationwide acceptance and recognition of Aboriginal people led to a significant increase in the number of people self-identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. The reappropriation of the term \"black\" with a positive and more inclusive meaning has resulted in its widespread use in mainstream Australian culture, including public media outlets, government agencies, and private companies. In 2012, a number of high-profile cases highlighted the legal and community attitude that identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander is not dependent on skin colour, with a well-known boxer Anthony Mundine being widely criticised for questioning the \"blackness\" of another boxer and journalist Andrew Bolt being successfully sued for publishing discriminatory comments about Aboriginals with light skin.\n\nJohn Caesar, nicknamed \"Black Caesar\", a convict and bushranger with parents born in an unknown area in Africa, was one of the first people of recent Black African ancestry to arrive in Australia.\n\nAt the 2006 Census, 248,605 residents declared that they were born in Africa. This figure pertains to all immigrants to Australia who were born in nations in Africa regardless of race, and includes White Africans.\n\nThere were eight principal areas used by Europeans to buy and ship slaves to the Western Hemisphere. The number of enslaved people sold to the New World varied throughout the slave trade. As for the distribution of slaves from regions of activity, certain areas produced far more enslaved people than others. Between 1650 and 1900, 10.24 million enslaved West Africans arrived in the Americas from the following regions in the following proportions:\n\nThe variants \"neger\" and \"negar\", derive from the Spanish and Portuguese word (black), and from the now-pejorative French \"nègre\" (negro). Etymologically, \"negro\", \"noir\", \"nègre\", and \"nigger\" ultimately derive from \"nigrum\", the stem of the Latin (black) (pronounced which, in every other grammatical case, grammatical gender, and grammatical number besides nominative masculine singular, is \"nigr-\", the \"r\" is trilled).\n\nIn the Colonial America of 1619, John Rolfe used \"negars\" in describing the slaves who were captured from West Africa and then shipped to the Virginia colony. Later American English spellings, \"neger\" and \"neggar\", prevailed in a northern colony, New York under the Dutch, and in metropolitan Philadelphia's Moravian and Pennsylvania Dutch communities; the African Burial Ground in New York City originally was known by the Dutch name \"Begraafplaats van de Neger\" (Cemetery of the Negro); an early US occurrence of \"neger\" in Rhode Island, dates from 1625. Thomas Jefferson also used the term \"black\" in his Notes on the State of Virginia in allusion to the slave populations.\n\nBy the 1900s, \"nigger\" had become a pejorative word in the United States. In its stead, the term \"colored\" became the mainstream alternative to \"negro\" and its derived terms. After the Civil Rights Movement, the terms \"colored\" and \"negro\" gave way to \"black\". \"Negro\" had superseded \"colored\" as the most polite word for African Americans at a time when \"black\" was considered more offensive. This term was accepted as normal, including by people classified as Negroes, until the later Civil Rights movement in the late 1960s. One well-known example is the identification by Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. of his own race as \"Negro\" in his famous speech of 1963, I Have a Dream. During the American Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s, some African-American leaders in the United States, notably Malcolm X, objected to the word \"Negro\" because they associated it with the long history of slavery, segregation, and discrimination that treated African Americans as second-class citizens, or worse. Malcolm X preferred \"Black\" to \"Negro\", but later gradually abandoned that as well for \"Afro-American\" after leaving the Nation of Islam.\n\nSince the late 1960s, various other terms for African Americans have been more widespread in popular usage. Aside from \"Black American\", these include \"Afro-American\" (in use from the late 1960s to 1990) and \"African American\" (used in the United States to refer to Black Americans, people often referred to in the past as \"American Negroes\").\n\nIn the first 200 years that black people were in the United States, they primarily identified themselves by their specific ethnic group (closely allied to language) and not by skin color. Individuals identified themselves, for example, as Ashanti, Igbo, Bakongo, or Wolof. However, when the first captives were brought to the Americas, they were often combined with other groups from West Africa, and individual ethnic affiliations were not generally acknowledged by English colonists. In areas of the Upper South, different ethnic groups were brought together. This is significant as the captives came from a vast geographic region: the West African coastline stretching from Senegal to Angola and in some cases from the south-east coast such as Mozambique. A new \"African-American\" identity and culture was born that incorporated elements of the various ethnic groups and of European cultural heritage, resulting in fusions such as the Black church and Black English. This new identity was based on provenance and slave status rather than membership in any one ethnic group. By contrast, slave records from Louisiana show that the French and Spanish colonists recorded more complete identities of the West Africans, including ethnicities and given tribal names.\n\nThe US racial or ethnic classification \"black\" refers to people with all possible kinds of skin pigmentation, from the darkest through to the very lightest skin colors, including albinos, if they are believed by others to have West African ancestry (in any discernible percentage), or to exhibit cultural traits associated with being \"African American\". As a result, in the United States the term \"black people\" is not an indicator of skin color or ethnic origin but is instead a socially based racial classification related to being African American, with a family history associated with institutionalized slavery. Relatively dark-skinned people can be classified as white if they fulfill other social criteria of \"whiteness\", and relatively light-skinned people can be classified as black if they fulfill the social criteria for \"blackness\" in a particular setting.\n\nIn March 1807, Great Britain, which largely controlled the Atlantic, declared the transatlantic slave trade illegal, as did the United States. (The latter prohibition took effect 1 January 1808, the earliest date on which Congress had the power to do so after protecting the slave trade under of the United States Constitution.)\n\nBy that time, the majority of black people in the United States were native-born, so the use of the term \"African\" became problematic. Though initially a source of pride, many blacks feared that the use of African as an identity would be a hindrance to their fight for full citizenship in the US. They also felt that it would give ammunition to those who were advocating repatriating black people back to Africa. In 1835, black leaders called upon Black Americans to remove the title of \"African\" from their institutions and replace it with \"Negro\" or \"Colored American\". A few institutions chose to keep their historic names, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church. African Americans popularly used the terms \"Negro\" or \"colored\" for themselves until the late 1960s.\n\nThe term \"black\" was used throughout but not frequently since it carried a certain stigma. In his 1963 \"I Have a Dream\" speech, Martin Luther King, Jr. uses the terms \"negro\" fifteen times and \"black\" four times. Each time he uses \"black\" it is in parallel construction with \"white\"; for example, \"black men and white men\".\n\nWith the successes of the civil rights movement, a new term was needed to break from the past and help shed the reminders of legalized discrimination. In place of \"Negro\", activists promoted the use of \"black\" as standing for racial pride, militancy, and power. Some of the turning points included the use of the term \"Black Power\" by Kwame Toure (Stokely Carmichael) and the popular singer James Brown's song \"Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud\".\n\nIn 1988, the civil rights leader Jesse Jackson urged Americans to use instead the term \"African American\" because it had a historical cultural base and was a construction similar to terms used by European descendants, such as German American, Italian American, etc. Since then, African American and black have often had parallel status. However, controversy continues over which if any of the two terms is more appropriate. Maulana Karenga argues that the term African-American is more appropriate because it accurately articulates their geographical and historical origin. Others have argued that \"black\" is a better term because \"African\" suggests foreignness, although Black Americans helped found the United States. Still others believe that the term black is inaccurate because African Americans have a variety of skin tones. Some surveys suggest that the majority of Black Americans have no preference for \"African American\" or \"Black\", although they have a slight preference for \"black\" in personal settings and \"African American\" in more formal settings.\n\nIn the U.S. census race definitions, Black and African Americans are citizens and residents of the United States with origins in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to the Office of Management and Budget, the grouping includes individuals who self-identify as African American, as well as persons who emigrated from nations in the Caribbean and Sub-Saharan Africa. The grouping is thus based on geography, and may contradict or misrepresent an individual's self-identification since not all immigrants from Sub-Saharan Africa are \"Black\". The Census Bureau also notes that these classifications are socio-political constructs and should not be interpreted as scientific or anthropological.\n\nAccording to US Census Bureau data, African immigrants generally do not self-identify as African American. The overwhelming majority of African immigrants identify instead with their own respective ethnicities (~95%). Immigrants from some Caribbean, Central American and South American nations and their descendants may or may not also self-identify with the term.\n\nRecent surveys of African Americans using a genetic testing service have found varied ancestries which show different tendencies by region and sex of ancestors. These studies found that on average, African Americans have 73.2–80.9% West African, 18–24% European, and 0.8–0.9% Native American genetic heritage, with large variation between individuals.\n\nFrom the late 19th century, the South used a colloquial term, the \"one-drop rule\", to classify as black a person of any known African ancestry. This practice of hypodescent was not put into law until the early 20th century. Legally the definition varied from state to state. Racial definition was more flexible in the 18th and 19th centuries before the American Civil War. For instance, President Thomas Jefferson held persons who were legally white (less than 25% black) according to Virginia law at the time, but, because they were born to slave mothers, they were born into slavery, according to the principle of \"partus sequitur ventrem\", which Virginia adopted into law in 1662.\n\nOutside of the US, some other countries have adopted the one-drop rule, but the definition of who is black and the extent to which the one-drop \"rule\" applies varies greatly from country to country.\n\nThe one-drop rule may have originated as a means of increasing the number of black slaves and was maintained as an attempt to keep the white race pure. One of the results of the one-drop rule was the uniting of the African-American community. Some of the most prominent abolitionists and civil-rights activists of the 19th century were multiracial, such as Frederick Douglass, Robert Purvis and James Mercer Langston. They advocated equality for all.\n\nThe concept of blackness in the United States has been described as the degree to which one associates themselves with mainstream African-American culture, politics, and values. To a certain extent, this concept is not so much about race but more about political orientation, culture and behavior. Blackness can be contrasted with \"acting white\", where black Americans are said to behave with assumed characteristics of stereotypical white Americans with regard to fashion, dialect, taste in music, and possibly, from the perspective of a significant number of black youth, academic achievement.\n\nDue to the often political and cultural contours of blackness in the United States, the notion of blackness can also be extended to non-black people. Toni Morrison once described Bill Clinton as the first black President of the United States, because, as she put it, he displayed \"almost every trope of blackness\". Christopher Hitchens was offended by the notion of Clinton as the first black president, noting, \"Mr Clinton, according to Toni Morrison, the Nobel Prize-winning novelist, is our first black President, the first to come from the broken home, the alcoholic mother, the under-the-bridge shadows of our ranking systems. Thus, we may have lost the mystical power to divine diabolism, but we can still divine blackness by the following symptoms: broken homes, alcoholic mothers, under-the-bridge habits and (presumable from the rest of [Arthur] Miller's senescent musings) the tendency to sexual predation and to shameless perjury about same.\" Some black activists were also offended, claiming that Clinton used his knowledge of black culture to exploit black people for political gain as no other president had before, while not serving black interests. They cite the lack of action during the Rwandan Genocide and his welfare reform, which Larry Roberts said had led to the worst child poverty since the 1960s. Others cited that the number of black people in jail increased during his administration.\n\nThe question of blackness also arose in the Democrat Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. Commentators have questioned whether Obama, who was elected the first President with black ancestry, is \"black enough\", contending that his background is not typical because his mother was white American, and his father was a black Kenyan immigrant. Obama chose to identify as black and African-American.\n\nIn July 2012, Ancestry.com reported on historic and DNA research by its staff that discovered that Obama is likely a descendant through his mother of John Punch, considered by some historians to be the first African slave in the Virginia colony. An indentured servant, he was \"bound for life\" in 1640 after trying to escape. The story of him and his descendants is that of multi-racial America since it appeared he and his sons married or had unions with white women, likely indentured servants and working-class like them. Their multi-racial children were free because they were born to free English women. Over time, Obama's line of the Bunch family (as they became known) were property owners and continued to \"marry white\"; they became part of white society, likely by the early to mid-18th century.\n\nApproximately 12 million Africans were shipped to the Americas during the Atlantic slave trade from 1492 to 1888, with 11.5 million of those shipped to South America and the Caribbean. Brazil was the largest importer in the Americas, with 5.5 million African slaves imported, followed by the British Caribbean with 2.76 million, the Spanish Caribbean and Spanish Mainland with 1.59 million Africans, and the French Caribbean with 1.32 million. Today their descendants number approximately 150 million in South America and the Caribbean. In addition to skin color, other physical characteristics such as facial features and hair texture are often variously used in classifying peoples as black in South America and the Caribbean. In South America and the Caribbean, classification as black is also closely tied to social status and socioeconomic variables, especially in light of social conceptions of \"blanqueamiento\" (racial whitening) and related concepts.\n\nThe concept of race in Brazil is complex. A Brazilian child was never automatically identified with the racial type of one or both of his or her parents, nor were there only two categories to choose from. Between an individual of unmixed West African descent and a very light mulatto individual, more than a dozen racial categories were acknowledged, based on various combinations of hair color, hair texture, eye color, and skin color. These types grade into each other like the colors of the spectrum, and no one category stands significantly isolated from the rest. In Brazil, people are classified by appearance, not heredity.\n\nScholars disagree over the effects of social status on racial classifications in Brazil. It is generally believed that achieving upward mobility and education results in individuals being classified as a category of lighter skin. The popular claim is that in Brazil, poor whites are considered black and wealthy blacks are considered white. Some scholars disagree, arguing that \"whitening\" of one's social status may be open to people of mixed race, a large part of the population known as \"pardo\", but a person perceived as \"preto\" (black) will continue to be classified as black regardless of wealth or social status.\n\nFrom the years 1500 to 1850, an estimated 3.5 million captives were forcibly shipped from West/Central Africa to Brazil; the territory received the highest number of slaves of any country in the Americas. Scholars estimate that more than half of the Brazilian population is at least in part descended from these individuals. Brazil has the largest population of Afro-descendants outside of Africa. In contrast to the US, during the slavery period and after, the Portuguese colonial government and later Brazilian government did not pass formal anti-miscegenation or segregation laws. As in other Latin American countries, intermarriage was prevalent during the colonial period and continued afterward. In addition, people of mixed race (\"pardo\") often tended to marry white spouses, and their descendants became accepted as white. As a result, some of the European descended population also has West African or Amerindian blood. According to the last census of the 20th century, in which Brazilians could choose from five color/ethnic categories with which they identified, 54% of individuals identified as white, 6.2% identified as black, and 39.5% identified as pardo (brown) — a broad multi-racial category, including tri-racial persons.\n\nIn the 19th century, a philosophy of racial whitening emerged in Brazil, related to the assimilation of mixed-race people into the white population through intermarriage. Until recently the government did not keep data on race. However, statisticians estimate that in 1835, roughly 50% of the population was \"preto\" (black; most were enslaved), a further 20% was \"pardo\" (brown), and 25% white, with the remainder Amerindian. Some classified as pardo were tri-racial.\n\nBy the 2000 census, demographic changes including the end to slavery, immigration from Europe and Asia, assimilation of multiracial persons, and other factors resulted in a population in which 6.2% of the population identified as black, 40% as pardo, and 55% as white. Essentially most of the black population was absorbed into the multi-racial category by intermixing. A 2007 genetic study found that at least 29% of the middle-class, white Brazilian population had some recent (since 1822 and the end of the colonial period) African ancestry.\n\nBecause of the acceptance of miscegenation, Brazil has avoided the binary polarization of society into black and white. In addition, it abolished slavery without a civil war. The bitter and sometimes violent racial tensions that have divided the US are notably absent in Brazil. According to the 2010 census, 6.7% of Brazilians said they were black, compared with 6.2% in 2000, and 43.1% said they were racially mixed, up from 38.5%. In 2010, Elio Ferreira de Araujo, Brazil's minister for racial equality, attributed the increases to growing pride among his country's black and indigenous communities.\n\nThe philosophy of the racial democracy in Brazil has drawn some criticism, based on economic issues. Brazil has one of the largest gaps in income distribution in the world. The richest 10% of the population earn 28 times the average income of the bottom 40%. The richest 10 percent is almost exclusively white or predominantly European in ancestry. One-third of the population lives under the poverty line, with blacks and other people of color accounting for 70 percent of the poor.\n\nIn 2015 United States, African Americans, including multiracial people, earned 76.8% as much as white people. By contrast, black and mixed race Brazilians earned on average 58% as much as whites in 2014. Some have posited that the facts of lower socioeconomic status for people of color suggest that Brazil practices a kind of one-drop rule, or discrimination against people who are not visibly European in ancestry. The gap in income between blacks and other non-whites is relatively small compared to the large gap between whites and all people of color. Other social factors, such as illiteracy and education levels, show the same patterns of disadvantage for people of color.\n\nSome commentators observe that the United States practice of segregation and white supremacy in the South, and discrimination in many areas outside that region, forced many African Americans to unite in the civil rights struggle, whereas the fluid nature of race in Brazil has divided individuals of African descent between those with more or less ancestry and helped sustain an image of the country as an example of post-colonial harmony. This has hindered the development of a common identity among black Brazilians.\n\nThough Brazilians of at least partial African heritage make up a large percentage of the population, few blacks have been elected as politicians. The city of Salvador, Bahia, for instance, is 80% people of color, but voters have not elected a mayor of color. Journalists like to say that US cities with black majorities, such as Detroit and New Orleans, have not elected white mayors since after the civil rights movement, when the Voting Rights Act of 1965 protected the franchise for minorities, and blacks in the South regained the power to vote for the first time since the turn of the 20th century. New Orleans elected its first black mayor in the 1970s. New Orleans elected a white mayor after the widescale disruption and damage of Hurricane Katrina in 2005.\n\nCritics note that people of color have limited media visibility. The Brazilian media has been accused of hiding or overlooking the nation's Black, Indigenous, Multiracial and East Asian populations. For example, the telenovelas or soaps are criticized for featuring actors who resemble northern Europeans rather than actors of the more prevalent Southern European features) and light-skinned mulatto and mestizo appearance. (Pardos may achieve \"white\" status if they have attained the middle-class or higher social status).\n\nThese patterns of discrimination against non-whites have led some academic and other activists to advocate for use of the Portuguese term \"negro\" to encompass all African-descended people, in order to stimulate a \"black\" consciousness and identity. This proposal has been criticized since the term pardo is considered to include a wide range of multiracial people, such as caboclos (mestizos), assimilated Amerindians and tri-racials, not only people of partial African and European descent. Trying to identify this entire group as \"black\" would be a false imposition of a different identity from outside the culture and deny people their other, equally valid, ancestries and cultures. It seems a one-drop rule in reverse.\n\n"}
